============================================================
 Chapter 3 - Finite Markov Decision Processes
 (PDF pages 69-94)
============================================================

--- Page 69 ---

Chapter 3
Finite Markov Decision
Processes
In this chapter we introduce the formal problem of ﬁnite Markov decision processes, or
ﬁnite MDPs, which we try to solve in the rest of the book. This problem involves evaluative
feedback, as in bandits, but also an associative aspect—choosing di↵erent actions in
di↵erent situations. MDPs are a classical formalization of sequential decision making,
where actions inﬂuence not just immediate rewards, but also subsequent situations,
or states, and through those future rewards. Thus MDPs involve delayed reward and
the need to trade o↵immediate and delayed reward. Whereas in bandit problems we
estimated the value q⇤(a) of each action a, in MDPs we estimate the value q⇤(s, a) of
each action a in each state s, or we estimate the value v⇤(s) of each state given optimal
action selections. These state-dependent quantities are essential to accurately assigning
credit for long-term consequences to individual action selections.
MDPs are a mathematically idealized form of the reinforcement learning problem
for which precise theoretical statements can be made. We introduce key elements of
the problem’s mathematical structure, such as returns, value functions, and Bellman
equations. We try to convey the wide range of applications that can be formulated as
ﬁnite MDPs. As in all of artiﬁcial intelligence, there is a tension between breadth of
applicability and mathematical tractability. In this chapter we introduce this tension
and discuss some of the trade-o↵s and challenges that it implies. Some ways in which
reinforcement learning can be taken beyond MDPs are treated in Chapter 17.
3.1
The Agent–Environment Interface
MDPs are meant to be a straightforward framing of the problem of learning from
interaction to achieve a goal. The learner and decision maker is called the agent. The
thing it interacts with, comprising everything outside the agent, is called the environment.
These interact continually, the agent selecting actions and the environment responding to


--- Page 70 ---

48
Chapter 3: Finite Markov Decision Processes
these actions and presenting new situations to the agent.1 The environment also gives
rise to rewards, special numerical values that the agent seeks to maximize over time
through its choice of actions.
Agent
Environment
action
At
reward
Rt
state
St
Rt+1
St+1
Figure 3.1: The agent–environment interaction in a Markov decision process.
More speciﬁcally, the agent and environment interact at each of a sequence of discrete
time steps, t = 0, 1, 2, 3, . . ..2 At each time step t, the agent receives some representation
of the environment’s state, St 2 S, and on that basis selects an action, At 2 A(s).3 One
time step later, in part as a consequence of its action, the agent receives a numerical
reward, Rt+1 2 R ⇢R, and ﬁnds itself in a new state, St+1.4 The MDP and agent
together thereby give rise to a sequence or trajectory that begins like this:
S0, A0, R1, S1, A1, R2, S2, A2, R3, . . .
(3.1)
In a ﬁnite MDP, the sets of states, actions, and rewards (S, A, and R) all have a ﬁnite
number of elements. In this case, the random variables Rt and St have well deﬁned
discrete probability distributions dependent only on the preceding state and action. That
is, for particular values of these random variables, s0 2 S and r 2 R, there is a probability
of those values occurring at time t, given particular values of the preceding state and
action:
p(s0, r|s, a)
.= Pr{St =s0, Rt =r | St−1 =s, At−1 =a},
(3.2)
for all s0, s 2 S, r 2 R, and a 2 A(s). The function p deﬁnes the dynamics of the MDP.
The dot over the equals sign in the equation reminds us that it is a deﬁnition (in this
case of the function p) rather than a fact that follows from previous deﬁnitions. The
dynamics function p : S ⇥R ⇥S ⇥A ! [0, 1] is an ordinary deterministic function of four
arguments. The ‘|’ in the middle of it comes from the notation for conditional probability,
1We use the terms agent, environment, and action instead of the engineers’ terms controller, controlled
system (or plant), and control signal because they are meaningful to a wider audience.
2We restrict attention to discrete time to keep things as simple as possible, even though many of the
ideas can be extended to the continuous-time case (e.g., see Bertsekas and Tsitsiklis, 1996; Doya, 1996).
3To simplify notation, we sometimes assume the special case in which the action set is the same in all
states and write it simply as A.
4We use Rt+1 instead of Rt to denote the reward due to At because it emphasizes that the next
reward and next state, Rt+1 and St+1, are jointly determined. Unfortunately, both conventions are
widely used in the literature.


--- Page 71 ---

3.1. The Agent–Environment Interface
49
but here it just reminds us that p speciﬁes a probability distribution for each choice of s
and a, that is, that
X
s02S
X
r2R
p(s0, r|s, a) = 1, for all s 2 S, a 2 A(s).
(3.3)
In a Markov decision process, the probabilities given by p completely characterize the
environment’s dynamics. That is, the probability of each possible value for St and Rt
depends on the immediately preceding state and action, St−1 and At−1, and, given them,
not at all on earlier states and actions. This is best viewed as a restriction not on the
decision process, but on the state. The state must include information about all aspects
of the past agent–environment interaction that make a di↵erence for the future. If it
does, then the state is said to have the Markov property. We will assume the Markov
property throughout this book, though starting in Part II we will consider approximation
methods that do not rely on it, and in Chapter 17 we consider how a Markov state can
be eﬃciently learned and constructed from non-Markov observations.
From the four-argument dynamics function, p, one can compute anything else one might
want to know about the environment, such as the state-transition probabilities (which we
denote, with a slight abuse of notation, as a three-argument function p : S⇥S⇥A ! [0, 1]),
p(s0|s, a)
.= Pr{St =s0 | St−1 =s, At−1 =a} =
X
r2R
p(s0, r|s, a).
(3.4)
We can also compute the expected rewards for state–action pairs as a two-argument
function r : S ⇥A ! R:
r(s, a)
.= E[Rt | St−1 =s, At−1 =a] =
X
r2R
r
X
s02S
p(s0, r|s, a),
(3.5)
and the expected rewards for state–action–next-state triples as a three-argument function
r : S ⇥A ⇥S ! R,
r(s, a, s0)
.= E[Rt | St−1 =s, At−1 =a, St = s0] =
X
r2R
r p(s0, r|s, a)
p(s0|s, a) .
(3.6)
In this book, we usually use the four-argument p function (3.2), but each of these other
notations are also occasionally convenient.
The MDP framework is abstract and ﬂexible and can be applied to many di↵erent
problems in many di↵erent ways. For example, the time steps need not refer to ﬁxed
intervals of real time; they can refer to arbitrary successive stages of decision making
and acting. The actions can be low-level controls, such as the voltages applied to the
motors of a robot arm, or high-level decisions, such as whether or not to have lunch or
to go to graduate school. Similarly, the states can take a wide variety of forms. They
can be completely determined by low-level sensations, such as direct sensor readings, or
they can be more high-level and abstract, such as symbolic descriptions of objects in a
room. Some of what makes up a state could be based on memory of past sensations or


--- Page 72 ---

50
Chapter 3: Finite Markov Decision Processes
even be entirely mental or subjective. For example, an agent could be in the state of not
being sure where an object is, or of having just been surprised in some clearly deﬁned
sense. Similarly, some actions might be totally mental or computational. For example,
some actions might control what an agent chooses to think about, or where it focuses its
attention. In general, actions can be any decisions we want to learn how to make, and
states can be anything we can know that might be useful in making them.
In particular, the boundary between agent and environment is typically not the same
as the physical boundary of a robot’s or an animal’s body. Usually, the boundary is
drawn closer to the agent than that. For example, the motors and mechanical linkages of
a robot and its sensing hardware should usually be considered parts of the environment
rather than parts of the agent. Similarly, if we apply the MDP framework to a person
or animal, the muscles, skeleton, and sensory organs should be considered part of the
environment. Rewards, too, presumably are computed inside the physical bodies of
natural and artiﬁcial learning systems, but are considered external to the agent.
The general rule we follow is that anything that cannot be changed arbitrarily by
the agent is considered to be outside of it and thus part of its environment. We do
not assume that everything in the environment is unknown to the agent. For example,
the agent often knows quite a bit about how its rewards are computed as a function of
its actions and the states in which they are taken. But we always consider the reward
computation to be external to the agent because it deﬁnes the task facing the agent and
thus must be beyond its ability to change arbitrarily. In fact, in some cases the agent may
know everything about how its environment works and still face a diﬃcult reinforcement
learning task, just as we may know exactly how a puzzle like Rubik’s cube works, but
still be unable to solve it. The agent–environment boundary represents the limit of the
agent’s absolute control, not of its knowledge.
The agent–environment boundary can be located at di↵erent places for di↵erent
purposes. In a complicated robot, many di↵erent agents may be operating at once, each
with its own boundary. For example, one agent may make high-level decisions which form
part of the states faced by a lower-level agent that implements the high-level decisions. In
practice, the agent–environment boundary is determined once one has selected particular
states, actions, and rewards, and thus has identiﬁed a speciﬁc decision-making task of
interest.
The MDP framework is a considerable abstraction of the problem of goal-directed
learning from interaction. It proposes that whatever the details of the sensory, memory,
and control apparatus, and whatever objective one is trying to achieve, any problem of
learning goal-directed behavior can be reduced to three signals passing back and forth
between an agent and its environment: one signal to represent the choices made by the
agent (the actions), one signal to represent the basis on which the choices are made (the
states), and one signal to deﬁne the agent’s goal (the rewards). This framework may not
be suﬃcient to represent all decision-learning problems usefully, but it has proved to be
widely useful and applicable.
Of course, the particular states and actions vary greatly from task to task, and how
they are represented can strongly a↵ect performance. In reinforcement learning, as in
other kinds of learning, such representational choices are at present more art than science.


--- Page 73 ---

3.1. The Agent–Environment Interface
51
In this book we o↵er some advice and examples regarding good ways of representing
states and actions, but our primary focus is on general principles for learning how to
behave once the representations have been selected.
Example 3.1: Bioreactor Suppose reinforcement learning is being applied to determine
moment-by-moment temperatures and stirring rates for a bioreactor (a large vat of
nutrients and bacteria used to produce useful chemicals).
The actions in such an
application might be target temperatures and target stirring rates that are passed to
lower-level control systems that, in turn, directly activate heating elements and motors to
attain the targets. The states are likely to be thermocouple and other sensory readings,
perhaps ﬁltered and delayed, plus symbolic inputs representing the ingredients in the
vat and the target chemical. The rewards might be moment-by-moment measures of the
rate at which the useful chemical is produced by the bioreactor. Notice that here each
state is a list, or vector, of sensor readings and symbolic inputs, and each action is a
vector consisting of a target temperature and a stirring rate. It is typical of reinforcement
learning tasks to have states and actions with such structured representations. Rewards,
on the other hand, are always single numbers.
Example 3.2: Pick-and-Place Robot
Consider using reinforcement learning to
control the motion of a robot arm in a repetitive pick-and-place task. If we want to learn
movements that are fast and smooth, the learning agent will have to control the motors
directly and have low-latency information about the current positions and velocities
of the mechanical linkages. The actions in this case might be the voltages applied to
each motor at each joint, and the states might be the latest readings of joint angles and
velocities. The reward might be +1 for each object successfully picked up and placed. To
encourage smooth movements, on each time step a small, negative reward could be given
as a function of the moment-to-moment jerkiness of the motion.
Exercise 3.1 Devise three example tasks of your own that ﬁt into the MDP framework,
identifying for each its states, actions, and rewards. Make the three examples as di↵erent
from each other as possible. The framework is abstract and ﬂexible and can be applied in
many di↵erent ways. Stretch its limits in some way in at least one of your examples. ⇤
Exercise 3.2 Is the MDP framework adequate to usefully represent all goal-directed
learning tasks? Can you think of any clear exceptions?
⇤
Exercise 3.3 Consider the problem of driving. You could deﬁne the actions in terms of
the accelerator, steering wheel, and brake, that is, where your body meets the machine.
Or you could deﬁne them farther out—say, where the rubber meets the road, considering
your actions to be tire torques. Or you could deﬁne them farther in—say, where your
brain meets your body, the actions being muscle twitches to control your limbs. Or you
could go to a really high level and say that your actions are your choices of where to drive.
What is the right level, the right place to draw the line between agent and environment?
On what basis is one location of the line to be preferred over another? Is there any
fundamental reason for preferring one location over another, or is it a free choice?
⇤


--- Page 74 ---

52
Chapter 3: Finite Markov Decision Processes
Example 3.3
Recycling Robot
A mobile robot has the job of collecting empty soda cans in an oﬃce environment. It
has sensors for detecting cans, and an arm and gripper that can pick them up and place
them in an onboard bin; it runs on a rechargeable battery. The robot’s control system
has components for interpreting sensory information, for navigating, and for controlling
the arm and gripper. High-level decisions about how to search for cans are made by a
reinforcement learning agent based on the current charge level of the battery. To make a
simple example, we assume that only two charge levels can be distinguished, comprising
a small state set S = {high, low}. In each state, the agent can decide whether to (1)
actively search for a can for a certain period of time, (2) remain stationary and wait
for someone to bring it a can, or (3) head back to its home base to recharge its battery.
When the energy level is high, recharging would always be foolish, so we do not include it
in the action set for this state. The action sets are then A(high) = {search, wait} and
A(low) = {search, wait, recharge}.
The rewards are zero most of the time, but become positive when the robot secures an
empty can, or large and negative if the battery runs all the way down. The best way to
ﬁnd cans is to actively search for them, but this runs down the robot’s battery, whereas
waiting does not. Whenever the robot is searching, the possibility exists that its battery
will become depleted. In this case the robot must shut down and wait to be rescued
(producing a low reward). If the energy level is high, then a period of active search can
always be completed without risk of depleting the battery. A period of searching that
begins with a high energy level leaves the energy level high with probability ↵and reduces
it to low with probability 1 −↵. On the other hand, a period of searching undertaken
when the energy level is low leaves it low with probability β and depletes the battery with
probability 1 −β. In the latter case, the robot must be rescued, and the battery is then
recharged back to high. Each can collected by the robot counts as a unit reward, whereas
a reward of −3 results whenever the robot has to be rescued. Let rsearch and rwait, with
rsearch > rwait, denote the expected number of cans the robot will collect (and hence the
expected reward) while searching and while waiting respectively. Finally, suppose that no
cans can be collected during a run home for recharging, and that no cans can be collected
on a step in which the battery is depleted. This system is then a ﬁnite MDP, and we
can write down the transition probabilities and the expected rewards, with dynamics as
indicated in the table on the left:
s
a
s0
p(s0 |s, a)
r(s, a, s0)
high
search
high
↵
rsearch
high
search
low
1 −↵
rsearch
low
search
high
1 −β
−3
low
search
low
β
rsearch
high
wait
high
1
rwait
high
wait
low
0
-
low
wait
high
0
-
low
wait
low
1
rwait
low
recharge
high
1
0
low
recharge
low
0
-
search
high
low
1,  0
search
recharge
wait
wait
β, rsearch
↵, rsearch
1−↵, rsearch
1−β, −3
1, rwait
1, rwait
Note that there is a row in the table for each possible combination of current state, s,
action, a 2 A(s), and next state, s0. Some transitions have zero probability of occurring,
so no expected reward is speciﬁed for them. Shown on the right is another useful way of


--- Page 75 ---

3.2. Goals and Rewards
53
summarizing the dynamics of a ﬁnite MDP, as a transition graph. There are two kinds of
nodes: state nodes and action nodes. There is a state node for each possible state (a large
open circle labeled by the name of the state), and an action node for each state–action
pair (a small solid circle labeled by the name of the action and connected by a line to the
state node). Starting in state s and taking action a moves you along the line from state
node s to action node (s, a). Then the environment responds with a transition to the next
state’s node via one of the arrows leaving action node (s, a). Each arrow corresponds to
a triple (s, s0, a), where s0 is the next state, and we label the arrow with the transition
probability, p(s0|s, a), and the expected reward for that transition, r(s, a, s0). Note that
the transition probabilities labeling the arrows leaving an action node always sum to 1.
Exercise 3.4
Give a table analogous to that in Example 3.3, but for p(s0, r|s, a). It
should have columns for s, a, s0, r, and p(s0, r|s, a), and a row for every 4-tuple for which
p(s0, r|s, a) > 0.
⇤
3.2
Goals and Rewards
In reinforcement learning, the purpose or goal of the agent is formalized in terms of a
special signal, called the reward, passing from the environment to the agent. At each time
step, the reward is a simple number, Rt 2 R. Informally, the agent’s goal is to maximize
the total amount of reward it receives. This means maximizing not immediate reward,
but cumulative reward in the long run. We can clearly state this informal idea as the
reward hypothesis:
That all of what we mean by goals and purposes can be well thought of as
the maximization of the expected value of the cumulative sum of a received
scalar signal (called reward).
The use of a reward signal to formalize the idea of a goal is one of the most distinctive
features of reinforcement learning.
Although formulating goals in terms of reward signals might at ﬁrst appear limiting,
in practice it has proved to be ﬂexible and widely applicable. The best way to see this is
to consider examples of how it has been, or could be, used. For example, to make a robot
learn to walk, researchers have provided reward on each time step proportional to the
robot’s forward motion. In making a robot learn how to escape from a maze, the reward
is often −1 for every time step that passes prior to escape; this encourages the agent to
escape as quickly as possible. To make a robot learn to ﬁnd and collect empty soda cans
for recycling, one might give it a reward of zero most of the time, and then a reward of
+1 for each can collected. One might also want to give the robot negative rewards when
it bumps into things or when somebody yells at it. For an agent to learn to play checkers
or chess, the natural rewards are +1 for winning, −1 for losing, and 0 for drawing and
for all nonterminal positions.
You can see what is happening in all of these examples. The agent always learns to
maximize its reward. If we want it to do something for us, we must provide rewards
to it in such a way that in maximizing them the agent will also achieve our goals. It


--- Page 76 ---

54
Chapter 3: Finite Markov Decision Processes
is thus critical that the rewards we set up truly indicate what we want accomplished.
In particular, the reward signal is not the place to impart to the agent prior knowledge
about how to achieve what we want it to do.5 For example, a chess-playing agent should
be rewarded only for actually winning, not for achieving subgoals such as taking its
opponent’s pieces or aining control of the center of the board. If achieving these sorts
of subgoals were rewarded, then the agent might ﬁnd a way to achieve them without
achieving the real goal. For example, it might ﬁnd a way to take the opponent’s pieces
even at the cost of losing the game.
The reward signal is your way of communicating to
the agent what you want achieved, not how you want it achieved.6
3.3
Returns and Episodes
So far we have discussed informally the objective of learning. We have said that the
agent’s goal is to maximize the cumulative reward it receives in the long run. How might
this be deﬁned formally? If the sequence of rewards received after time step t is denoted
Rt+1, Rt+2, Rt+3, . . ., then what precise aspect of this sequence do we wish to maximize?
In general, we seek to maximize the expected return, where the return, denoted Gt, is
deﬁned as some speciﬁc function of the reward sequence. In the simplest case the return
is the sum of the rewards:
Gt .= Rt+1 + Rt+2 + Rt+3 + · · · + RT ,
(3.7)
where T is a ﬁnal time step. This approach makes sense in applications in which there
is a natural notion of ﬁnal time step, that is, when the agent–environment interaction
breaks naturally into subsequences, which we call episodes,7 such as plays of a game,
trips through a maze, or any sort of repeated interaction. Each episode ends in a special
state called the terminal state, followed by a reset to a standard starting state or to a
sample from a standard distribution of starting states. Even if you think of episodes as
ending in di↵erent ways, such as winning and losing a game, the next episode begins
independently of how the previous one ended. Thus the episodes can all be considered to
end in the same terminal state, with di↵erent rewards for the di↵erent outcomes. Tasks
with episodes of this kind are called episodic tasks. In episodic tasks we sometimes need
to distinguish the set of all nonterminal states, denoted S, from the set of all states plus
the terminal state, denoted S+. The time of termination, T, is a random variable that
normally varies from episode to episode.
On the other hand, in many cases the agent–environment interaction does not break
naturally into identiﬁable episodes, but goes on continually without limit. For example,
this would be the natural way to formulate an on-going process-control task, or an
application to a robot with a long life span. We call these continuing tasks. The return
formulation (3.7) is problematic for continuing tasks because the ﬁnal time step would be
T = 1, and the return, which is what we are trying to maximize, could easily be inﬁnite.
5Better places for imparting this kind of prior knowledge are the initial policy or initial value function.
6Section 17.4 delves further into the issue of designing e↵ective reward signals.
7Episodes are sometimes called “trials” in the literature.


--- Page 77 ---

3.3. Returns and Episodes
55
(For example, suppose the agent receives a reward of +1 at each time step.) Thus, in this
book we usually use a deﬁnition of return that is slightly more complex conceptually but
much simpler mathematically.
The additional concept that we need is that of discounting. According to this approach,
the agent tries to select actions so that the sum of the discounted rewards it receives over
the future is maximized. In particular, it chooses At to maximize the expected discounted
return:
Gt
.= Rt+1 + γRt+2 + γ2Rt+3 + · · · =
1
X
k=0
γkRt+k+1,
(3.8)
where γ is a parameter, 0 γ 1, called the discount rate.
The discount rate determines the present value of future rewards: a reward received
k time steps in the future is worth only γk−1 times what it would be worth if it were
received immediately. If γ < 1, the inﬁnite sum in (3.8) has a ﬁnite value as long as the
reward sequence {Rk} is bounded. If γ = 0, the agent is “myopic” in being concerned
only with maximizing immediate rewards: its objective in this case is to learn how to
choose At so as to maximize only Rt+1. If each of the agent’s actions happened to
inﬂuence only the immediate reward, not future rewards as well, then a myopic agent
could maximize (3.8) by separately maximizing each immediate reward. But in general,
acting to maximize immediate reward can reduce access to future rewards so that the
return is reduced. As γ approaches 1, the return objective takes future rewards into
account more strongly; the agent becomes more farsighted.
Returns at successive time steps are related to each other in a way that is important
for the theory and algorithms of reinforcement learning:
Gt .= Rt+1 + γRt+2 + γ2Rt+3 + γ3Rt+4 + · · ·
= Rt+1 + γ
#
Rt+2 + γRt+3 + γ2Rt+4 + · · ·
$
= Rt+1 + γGt+1
(3.9)
Note that this works for all time steps t < T, even if termination occurs at t + 1, provided
we deﬁne GT = 0. This often makes it easy to compute returns from reward sequences.
Note that although the return (3.8) is a sum of an inﬁnite number of terms, it is still
ﬁnite if the reward is nonzero and constant—if γ < 1. For example, if the reward is a
constant +1, then the return is
Gt =
1
X
k=0
γk =
1
1 −γ .
(3.10)
Exercise 3.5 The equations in Section 3.1 are for the continuing case and need to be
modiﬁed (very slightly) to apply to episodic tasks. Show that you know the modiﬁcations
needed by giving the modiﬁed version of (3.3).
⇤


--- Page 78 ---

56
Chapter 3: Finite Markov Decision Processes
Example 3.4: Pole-Balancing
The objective in this task is to apply
forces to a cart moving along a track
so as to keep a pole hinged to the cart
from falling over: A failure is said to
occur if the pole falls past a given angle
from vertical or if the cart runs o↵the
track.
The pole is reset to vertical
after each failure. This task could be
treated as episodic, where the natural
episodes are the repeated attempts to balance the pole. The reward in this case could be
+1 for every time step on which failure did not occur, so that the return at each time
would be the number of steps until failure. In this case, successful balancing forever would
mean a return of inﬁnity. Alternatively, we could treat pole-balancing as a continuing
task, using discounting. In this case the reward would be −1 on each failure and zero at
all other times. The return at each time would then be related to −γK−1, where K is
the number of time steps before failure (as well as to the times of later failures). In either
case, the return is maximized by keeping the pole balanced for as long as possible.
Exercise 3.6
Suppose you treated pole-balancing as an episodic task but also used
discounting, with all rewards zero except for −1 upon failure. What then would the
return be at each time? How does this return di↵er from that in the discounted, continuing
formulation of this task?
⇤
Exercise 3.7 Imagine that you are designing a robot to run a maze. You decide to give it a
reward of +1 for escaping from the maze and a reward of zero at all other times. The task
seems to break down naturally into episodes—the successive runs through the maze—so
you decide to treat it as an episodic task, where the goal is to maximize expected total
reward (3.7). After running the learning agent for a while, you ﬁnd that it is showing
no improvement in escaping from the maze. What is going wrong? Have you e↵ectively
communicated to the agent what you want it to achieve?
⇤
Exercise 3.8 Suppose γ = 0.5 and the following sequence of rewards is received R1 = −1,
R2 = 2, R3 = 6, R4 = 3, and R5 = 2, with T = 5. What are G0, G1, . . ., G5? Hint:
Work backwards.
⇤
Exercise 3.9 Suppose γ = 0.9 and the reward sequence is R1 = 2 followed by an inﬁnite
sequence of 7s. What are G1 and G0?
⇤
Exercise 3.10 Prove the second equality in (3.10).
⇤


--- Page 79 ---

3.4. Uniﬁed Notation for Episodic and Continuing Tasks
57
3.4
Uniﬁed Notation for Episodic and Continuing Tasks
In the preceding section we described two kinds of reinforcement learning tasks, one
in which the agent–environment interaction naturally breaks down into a sequence of
separate episodes (episodic tasks), and one in which it does not (continuing tasks). The
former case is mathematically easier because each action a↵ects only the ﬁnite number of
rewards subsequently received during the episode. In this book we consider sometimes
one kind of problem and sometimes the other, but often both. It is therefore useful to
establish one notation that enables us to talk precisely about both cases simultaneously.
To be precise about episodic tasks requires some additional notation. Rather than one
long sequence of time steps, we need to consider a series of episodes, each of which consists
of a ﬁnite sequence of time steps. We number the time steps of each episode starting
anew from zero. Therefore, we have to refer not just to St, the state representation at
time t, but to St,i, the state representation at time t of episode i (and similarly for At,i,
Rt,i, ⇡t,i, Ti, etc.). However, it turns out that when we discuss episodic tasks we almost
never have to distinguish between di↵erent episodes. We are almost always considering
a particular episode, or stating something that is true for all episodes. Accordingly, in
practice we almost always abuse notation slightly by dropping the explicit reference to
episode number. That is, we write St to refer to St,i, and so on.
We need one other convention to obtain a single notation that covers both episodic
and continuing tasks. We have deﬁned the return as a sum over a ﬁnite number of terms
in one case (3.7) and as a sum over an inﬁnite number of terms in the other (3.8). These
two can be uniﬁed by considering episode termination to be the entering of a special
absorbing state that transitions only to itself and that generates only rewards of zero. For
example, consider the state transition diagram:
R1 = +1
S0
S1
R2 = +1
S2
R3 = +1
R4 = 0
R5 = 0
. . .
Here the solid square represents the special absorbing state corresponding to the end of an
episode. Starting from S0, we get the reward sequence +1, +1, +1, 0, 0, 0, . . .. Summing
these, we get the same return whether we sum over the ﬁrst T rewards (here T = 3) or
over the full inﬁnite sequence. This remains true even if we introduce discounting. Thus,
we can deﬁne the return, in general, according to (3.8), using the convention of omitting
episode numbers when they are not needed, and including the possibility that γ = 1 if the
sum remains deﬁned (e.g., because all episodes terminate). Alternatively, we can write
Gt .=
T
X
k=t+1
γk−t−1Rk,
(3.11)
including the possibility that T = 1 or γ = 1 (but not both). We use these conventions
throughout the rest of the book to simplify notation and to express the close parallels


--- Page 80 ---

58
Chapter 3: Finite Markov Decision Processes
between episodic and continuing tasks.
(Later, in Chapter 10, we will introduce a
formulation that is both continuing and undiscounted.)
3.5
Policies and Value Functions
Almost all reinforcement learning algorithms involve estimating value functions—functions
of states (or of state–action pairs) that estimate how good it is for the agent to be in a
given state (or how good it is to perform a given action in a given state). The notion
of “how good” here is deﬁned in terms of future rewards that can be expected, or, to
be precise, in terms of expected return. Of course the rewards the agent can expect to
receive in the future depend on what actions it will take. Accordingly, value functions
are deﬁned with respect to particular ways of acting, called policies.
Formally, a policy is a mapping from states to probabilities of selecting each possible
action. If the agent is following policy ⇡at time t, then ⇡(a|s) is the probability that
At = a if St = s. Like p, ⇡is an ordinary function; the “|” in the middle of ⇡(a|s)
merely reminds us that it deﬁnes a probability distribution over a 2 A(s) for each s 2 S.
Reinforcement learning methods specify how the agent’s policy is changed as a result of
its experience.
Exercise 3.11 If the current state is St, and actions are selected according to a stochastic
policy ⇡, then what is the expectation of Rt+1 in terms of ⇡and the four-argument
function p (3.2)?
⇤
The value function of a state s under a policy ⇡, denoted v⇡(s), is the expected return
when starting in s and following ⇡thereafter. For MDPs, we can deﬁne v⇡formally by
v⇡(s)
.= E⇡[Gt | St =s] = E⇡
" 1
X
k=0
γkRt+k+1
44444 St =s
#
, for all s 2 S,
(3.12)
where E⇡[·] denotes the expected value of a random variable given that the agent follows
policy ⇡, and t is any time step. Note that the value of the terminal state, if any, is
always zero. We call the function v⇡the state-value function for policy ⇡.
Similarly, we deﬁne the value of taking action a in state s under a policy ⇡, denoted
q⇡(s, a), as the expected return starting from s, taking the action a, and thereafter
following policy ⇡:
q⇡(s, a)
.= E⇡[Gt | St =s, At = a] = E⇡
" 1
X
k=0
γkRt+k+1
44444 St =s, At =a
#
.
(3.13)
We call q⇡the action-value function for policy ⇡.
Exercise 3.12 Give an equation for v⇡in terms of q⇡and ⇡.
⇤
Exercise 3.13 Give an equation for q⇡in terms of v⇡and the four-argument p.
⇤
The value functions v⇡and q⇡can be estimated from experience. For example, if an
agent follows policy ⇡and maintains an average, for each state encountered, of the actual
returns that have followed that state, then the average will converge to the state’s value,
v⇡(s), as the number of times that state is encountered approaches inﬁnity. If separate


--- Page 81 ---

3.5. Policies and Value Functions
59
averages are kept for each action taken in each state, then these averages will similarly
converge to the action values, q⇡(s, a). We call estimation methods of this kind Monte
Carlo methods because they involve averaging over many random samples of actual returns.
These kinds of methods are presented in Chapter 5. Of course, if there are very many
states, then it may not be practical to keep separate averages for each state individually.
Instead, the agent would have to maintain v⇡and q⇡as parameterized functions (with
fewer parameters than states) and adjust the parameters to better match the observed
returns. This can also produce accurate estimates, although much depends on the nature
of the parameterized function approximator. These possibilities are discussed in Part II
of the book.
A fundamental property of value functions used throughout reinforcement learning and
dynamic programming is that they satisfy recursive relationships similar to that which
we have already established for the return (3.9). For any policy ⇡and any state s, the
following consistency condition holds between the value of s and the value of its possible
successor states:
v⇡(s) .= E⇡[Gt | St =s]
= E⇡[Rt+1 + γGt+1 | St =s]
(by (3.9))
=
X
a
⇡(a|s)
X
s0
X
r
p(s0, r|s, a)
h
r + γE⇡[Gt+1|St+1 =s0]
i
=
X
a
⇡(a|s)
X
s0,r
p(s0, r|s, a)
h
r + γv⇡(s0)
i
,
for all s 2 S,
(3.14)
where it is implicit that the actions, a, are taken from the set A(s), that the next states,
s0, are taken from the set S (or from S+ in the case of an episodic problem), and that
the rewards, r, are taken from the set R. Note also how in the last equation we have
merged the two sums, one over all the values of s0 and the other over all the values of r,
into one sum over all the possible values of both. We use this kind of merged sum often
to simplify formulas. Note how the ﬁnal expression can be read easily as an expected
value. It is really a sum over all values of the three variables, a, s0, and r. For each triple,
we compute its probability, ⇡(a|s)p(s0, r|s, a), weight the quantity in brackets by that
probability, then sum over all possibilities to get an expected value.
⇡
s
s0
⇡
r
p
a
Backup diagram for v⇡
Equation (3.14) is the Bellman equation for v⇡. It expresses
a relationship between the value of a state and the values of
its successor states. Think of looking ahead from a state to its
possible successor states, as suggested by the diagram to the
right. Each open circle represents a state and each solid circle
represents a state–action pair. Starting from state s, the root
node at the top, the agent could take any of some set of actions—
three are shown in the diagram—based on its policy ⇡. From
each of these, the environment could respond with one of several next states, s0 (two are
shown in the ﬁgure), along with a reward, r, depending on its dynamics given by the
function p. The Bellman equation (3.14) averages over all the possibilities, weighting each
by its probability of occurring. It states that the value of the start state must equal the
(discounted) value of the expected next state, plus the reward expected along the way.


--- Page 82 ---

60
Chapter 3: Finite Markov Decision Processes
The value function v⇡is the unique solution to its Bellman equation. We show in
subsequent chapters how this Bellman equation forms the basis of a number of ways to
compute, approximate, and learn v⇡. We call diagrams like that above backup diagrams
because they diagram relationships that form the basis of the update or backup operations
that are at the heart of reinforcement learning methods. These operations transfer
value information back to a state (or a state–action pair) from its successor states (or
state–action pairs). We use backup diagrams throughout the book to provide graphical
summaries of the algorithms we discuss. (Note that, unlike transition graphs, the state
nodes of backup diagrams do not necessarily represent distinct states; for example, a
state might be its own successor.)
Example 3.5: Gridworld Figure 3.2 (left) shows a rectangular gridworld representation
of a simple ﬁnite MDP. The cells of the grid correspond to the states of the environment. At
each cell, four actions are possible: north, south, east, and west, which deterministically
cause the agent to move one cell in the respective direction on the grid. Actions that
would take the agent o↵the grid leave its location unchanged, but also result in a reward
of −1. Other actions result in a reward of 0, except those that move the agent out of the
special states A and B. From state A, all four actions yield a reward of +10 and take the
agent to A0. From state B, all actions yield a reward of +5 and take the agent to B0.
3.3 8.8 4.4 5.3 1.5
1.5 3.0 2.3 1.9 0.5
0.1 0.7 0.7 0.4 -0.4
-1.0 -0.4 -0.4 -0.6 -1.2
-1.9 -1.3 -1.2 -1.4 -2.0
A
B
A'
B'
+10
+5
Actions
Figure 3.2: Gridworld example: exceptional reward dynamics (left) and state-value function
for the equiprobable random policy (right).
Suppose the agent selects all four actions with equal probability in all states. Figure 3.2
(right) shows the value function, v⇡, for this policy, for the discounted reward case with
γ = 0.9. This value function was computed by solving the system of linear equations
(3.14). Notice the negative values near the lower edge; these are the result of the high
probability of hitting the edge of the grid there under the random policy. State A is
the best state to be in under this policy. Note that A’s expected return is less than its
immediate reward of 10, because from A the agent is taken to state A0 from which it is
likely to run into the edge of the grid. State B, on the other hand, is valued more than
its immediate reward of 5, because from B the agent is taken to B0 which has a positive
value. From B0 the expected penalty (negative reward) for possibly running into an edge
is more than compensated for by the expected gain for possibly stumbling onto A or B.
Exercise 3.14 The Bellman equation (3.14) must hold for each state for the value function
v⇡shown in Figure 3.2 (right) of Example 3.5. Show numerically that this equation holds
for the center state, valued at +0.7, with respect to its four neighboring states, valued at
+2.3, +0.4, −0.4, and +0.7. (These numbers are accurate only to one decimal place.) ⇤


--- Page 83 ---

3.5. Policies and Value Functions
61
Exercise 3.15
In the gridworld example, rewards are positive for goals, negative for
running into the edge of the world, and zero the rest of the time. Are the signs of these
rewards important, or only the intervals between them? Prove, using (3.8), that adding a
constant c to all the rewards adds a constant, vc, to the values of all states, and thus
does not a↵ect the relative values of any states under any policies. What is vc in terms
of c and γ?
⇤
Exercise 3.16 Now consider adding a constant c to all the rewards in an episodic task,
such as maze running. Would this have any e↵ect, or would it leave the task unchanged
as in the continuing task above? Why or why not? Give an example.
⇤
Example 3.6: Golf
To formulate playing a hole of golf as a reinforcement learning
task, we count a penalty (negative reward) of −1 for each stroke until we hit the ball
into the hole. The state is the location of the ball. The value of a state is the negative of
the number of strokes to the hole from that location. Our actions are how we aim and
swing at the ball, of course, and which club we select. Let us take the former as given
and consider just the choice of club, which we assume is either a putter or a driver. The
upper part of Figure 3.3 shows a possible state-value function, vputt(s), for the policy that
Q*(s,driver)
V
putt
sand
green
!1
s a
n
d
!2
!2
!3
!4
!1
!5
!6
!4
!3
!3
!2
!4
sand
green
!1
s a
n
d
!2
!3
!2
0
0
!"
!"
vputt
q⇤(s, driver)
Figure 3.3: A golf example: the state-value func-
tion for putting (upper) and the optimal action-
value function for using the driver (lower).
always uses the putter.
The terminal
state in-the-hole has a value of 0. From
anywhere on the green we assume we can
make a putt; these states have value −1.
O↵the green we cannot reach the hole by
putting, and the value is lower. If we can
reach the green from a state by putting,
then that state must have value one less
than the green’s value, that is, −2. For
simplicity, let us assume we can putt very
precisely and deterministically, but with
a limited range. This gives us the sharp
contour line labeled −2 in the ﬁgure; all
locations between that line and the green
require exactly two strokes to complete
the hole. Similarly, any location within
putting range of the −2 contour line must
have a value of −3, and so on to get all the
contour lines shown in the ﬁgure. Putting
doesn’t get us out of sand traps, so they
have a value of −1. Overall, it takes us
six strokes to get from the tee to the hole
by putting.
r
s0
s, a
a0
⇡
p
q⇡backup diagram
Exercise 3.17 What is the Bellman equation for action values, that
is, for q⇡? It must give the action value q⇡(s, a) in terms of the action
values, q⇡(s0, a0), of possible successors to the state–action pair (s, a).
Hint: The backup diagram to the right corresponds to this equation.
Show the sequence of equations analogous to (3.14), but for action
values.
⇤


--- Page 84 ---

62
Chapter 3: Finite Markov Decision Processes
Exercise 3.18 The value of a state depends on the values of the actions possible in that
state and on how likely each action is to be taken under the current policy. We can
think of this in terms of a small backup diagram rooted at the state and considering each
possible action:
s
taken with
probability ⇡(a|s)
v⇡(s)
q⇡(s, a)
a1
a2
a3
Give the equation corresponding to this intuition and diagram for the value at the root
node, v⇡(s), in terms of the value at the expected leaf node, q⇡(s, a), given St = s. This
equation should include an expectation conditioned on following the policy, ⇡. Then give
a second equation in which the expected value is written out explicitly in terms of ⇡(a|s)
such that no expected value notation appears in the equation.
⇤
Exercise 3.19 The value of an action, q⇡(s, a), depends on the expected next reward and
the expected sum of the remaining rewards. Again we can think of this in terms of a
small backup diagram, this one rooted at an action (state–action pair) and branching to
the possible next states:
s, a
q⇡(s, a)
s0
3
s0
2
s0
1
r1
r2
r3
v⇡(s0)
expected
rewards
Give the equation corresponding to this intuition and diagram for the action value,
q⇡(s, a), in terms of the expected next reward, Rt+1, and the expected next state value,
v⇡(St+1), given that St =s and At =a. This equation should include an expectation but
not one conditioned on following the policy. Then give a second equation, writing out the
expected value explicitly in terms of p(s0, r|s, a) deﬁned by (3.2), such that no expected
value notation appears in the equation.
⇤
3.6
Optimal Policies and Optimal Value Functions
Solving a reinforcement learning task means, roughly, ﬁnding a policy that achieves a lot
of reward over the long run. For ﬁnite MDPs, we can precisely deﬁne an optimal policy
in the following way. Value functions deﬁne a partial ordering over policies. A policy ⇡is
deﬁned to be better than or equal to a policy ⇡0 if its expected return is greater than
or equal to that of ⇡0 for all states. In other words, ⇡≥⇡0 if and only if v⇡(s) ≥v⇡0(s)
for all s 2 S. There is always at least one policy that is better than or equal to all other
policies. This is an optimal policy. Although there may be more than one, we denote all
the optimal policies by ⇡⇤. They share the same state-value function, called the optimal
state-value function, denoted v⇤, and deﬁned as
v⇤(s) .= max
⇡
v⇡(s),
(3.15)
for all s 2 S.


--- Page 85 ---

3.6. Optimal Policies and Optimal Value Functions
63
Optimal policies also share the same optimal action-value function, denoted q⇤, and
deﬁned as
q⇤(s, a) .= max
⇡
q⇡(s, a),
(3.16)
for all s 2 S and a 2 A(s). For the state–action pair (s, a), this function gives the
expected return for taking action a in state s and thereafter following an optimal policy.
Thus, we can write q⇤in terms of v⇤as follows:
q⇤(s, a) = E[Rt+1 + γv⇤(St+1) | St =s, At =a] .
(3.17)
Example 3.7: Optimal Value Functions for Golf
The lower part of Figure 3.3
shows the contours of a possible optimal action-value function q⇤(s, driver). These are
the values of each state if we ﬁrst play a stroke with the driver and afterward select either
the driver or the putter, whichever is better. The driver enables us to hit the ball farther,
but with less accuracy. We can reach the hole in one shot using the driver only if we
are already very close; thus the −1 contour for q⇤(s, driver) covers only a small portion
of the green. If we have two strokes, however, then we can reach the hole from much
farther away, as shown by the −2 contour. In this case we don’t have to drive all the way
to within the small −1 contour, but only to anywhere on the green; from there we can
use the putter. The optimal action-value function gives the values after committing to a
particular ﬁrst action, in this case, to the driver, but afterward using whichever actions
are best. The −3 contour is still farther out and includes the starting tee. From the tee,
the best sequence of actions is two drives and one putt, sinking the ball in three strokes.
Because v⇤is the value function for a policy, it must satisfy the self-consistency
condition given by the Bellman equation for state values (3.14). Because it is the optimal
value function, however, v⇤’s consistency condition can be written in a special form
without reference to any speciﬁc policy. This is the Bellman equation for v⇤, or the
Bellman optimality equation. Intuitively, the Bellman optimality equation expresses the
fact that the value of a state under an optimal policy must equal the expected return for
the best action from that state:
v⇤(s) = max
a2A(s) q⇡⇤(s, a)
= max
a
E⇡⇤[Gt | St =s, At =a]
= max
a
E⇡⇤[Rt+1 + γGt+1 | St =s, At =a]
(by (3.9))
= max
a
E[Rt+1 + γv⇤(St+1) | St =s, At =a]
(3.18)
= max
a
X
s0,r
p(s0, r|s, a)
⇥
r + γv⇤(s0)
⇤
.
(3.19)


--- Page 86 ---

64
Chapter 3: Finite Markov Decision Processes
The last two equations are two forms of the Bellman optimality equation for v⇤. The
Bellman optimality equation for q⇤is
q⇤(s, a)
=
E
h
Rt+1 + γ max
a0 q⇤(St+1, a0)
444 St = s, At = a
i
=
X
s0,r
p(s0, r|s, a)
h
r + γ max
a0 q⇤(s0, a0)
i
.
(3.20)
The backup diagrams in the ﬁgure below show graphically the spans of future states
and actions considered in the Bellman optimality equations for v⇤and q⇤. These are the
same as the backup diagrams for v⇡and q⇡presented earlier except that arcs have been
added at the agent’s choice points to represent that the maximum over that choice is
taken rather than the expected value given some policy. The backup diagram on the left
graphically represents the Bellman optimality equation (3.19) and the backup diagram
on the right graphically represents (3.20).
s
s0
a
r
r
s0
s, a
a0
max
max
(v⇤)
(q⇤)
Figure 3.4: Backup diagrams for v⇤and q⇤
For ﬁnite MDPs, the Bellman optimality equation for v⇤(3.19) has a unique solution.
The Bellman optimality equation is actually a system of equations, one for each state, so
if there are n states, then there are n equations in n unknowns. If the dynamics p of the
environment are known, then in principle one can solve this system of equations for v⇤
using any one of a variety of methods for solving systems of nonlinear equations. One
can solve a related set of equations for q⇤.
Once one has v⇤, it is relatively easy to determine an optimal policy. For each state
s, there will be one or more actions at which the maximum is obtained in the Bellman
optimality equation. Any policy that assigns nonzero probability only to these actions is
an optimal policy. You can think of this as a one-step search. If you have the optimal
value function, v⇤, then the actions that appear best after a one-step search will be optimal
actions. Another way of saying this is that any policy that is greedy with respect to the
optimal evaluation function v⇤is an optimal policy. The term greedy is used in computer
science to describe any search or decision procedure that selects alternatives based only
on local or immediate considerations, without considering the possibility that such a
selection may prevent future access to even better alternatives. Consequently, it describes
policies that select actions based only on their short-term consequences. The beauty of v⇤
is that if one uses it to evaluate the short-term consequences of actions—speciﬁcally, the
one-step consequences—then a greedy policy is actually optimal in the long-term sense in
which we are interested because v⇤already takes into account the reward consequences of
all possible future behavior. By means of v⇤, the optimal expected long-term return is


--- Page 87 ---

3.6. Optimal Policies and Optimal Value Functions
65
turned into a quantity that is locally and immediately available for each state. Hence, a
one-step-ahead search yields the long-term optimal actions.
Having q⇤makes choosing optimal actions even easier. With q⇤, the agent does not
even have to do a one-step-ahead search: for any state s, it can simply ﬁnd any action
that maximizes q⇤(s, a). The action-value function e↵ectively caches the results of all
one-step-ahead searches. It provides the optimal expected long-term return as a value
that is locally and immediately available for each state–action pair. Hence, at the cost of
representing a function of state–action pairs, instead of just of states, the optimal action-
value function allows optimal actions to be selected without having to know anything
about possible successor states and their values, that is, without having to know anything
about the environment’s dynamics.
Example 3.8: Solving the Gridworld Suppose we solve the Bellman equation for v⇤
for the simple grid task introduced in Example 3.5 and shown again in Figure 3.5 (left).
Recall that state A is followed by a reward of +10 and transition to state A0, while state
B is followed by a reward of +5 and transition to state B0. Figure 3.5 (middle) shows the
optimal value function, and Figure 3.5 (right) shows the corresponding optimal policies.
Where there are multiple arrows in a cell, all of the corresponding actions are optimal.
a) gridworld
b) V*
c) !*
22.0 24.4 22.0 19.4 17.5
19.8 22.0 19.8 17.8 16.0
17.8 19.8 17.8 16.0 14.4
16.0 17.8 16.0 14.4 13.0
14.4 16.0 14.4 13.0 11.7
A
B
A'
B'
+10
+5
v*
π*
Gridworld
v⇤
⇡⇤
Figure 3.5: Optimal solutions to the gridworld example.
Example 3.9: Bellman Optimality Equations for the Recycling Robot
Using
(3.19), we can explicitly give the Bellman optimality equation for the recycling robot
example. To make things more compact, we abbreviate the states high and low, and the
actions search, wait, and recharge respectively by h, l, s, w, and re. Because there are
only two states, the Bellman optimality equation consists of two equations. The equation
for v⇤(h) can be written as follows:
v⇤(h)
=
max
⇢p(h|h, s)[r(h, s, h) + γv⇤(h)] + p(l|h, s)[r(h, s, l) + γv⇤(l)],
p(h|h, w)[r(h, w, h) + γv⇤(h)] + p(l|h, w)[r(h, w, l) + γv⇤(l)]
5
=
max
⇢
↵[rs + γv⇤(h)] + (1 −↵)[rs + γv⇤(l)],
1[rw + γv⇤(h)] + 0[rw + γv⇤(l)]
5
=
max
⇢rs + γ[↵v⇤(h) + (1 −↵)v⇤(l)],
rw + γv⇤(h)
5
.


--- Page 88 ---

66
Chapter 3: Finite Markov Decision Processes
Following the same procedure for v⇤(l) yields the equation
v⇤(l) = max
8
<
:
βrs −3(1 −β) + γ[(1 −β)v⇤(h) + βv⇤(l)],
rw + γv⇤(l),
γv⇤(h)
9
=
; .
For any choice of rs, rw, ↵, β, and γ, with 0 γ < 1, 0 ↵, β 1, there is exactly
one pair of numbers, v⇤(h) and v⇤(l), that simultaneously satisfy these two nonlinear
equations.
Explicitly solving the Bellman optimality equation provides one route to ﬁnding an
optimal policy, and thus to solving the reinforcement learning problem. However, this
solution is rarely directly useful. It is akin to an exhaustive search, looking ahead at
all possibilities, computing their probabilities of occurrence and their desirabilities in
terms of expected rewards. This solution relies on at least three assumptions that are
rarely true in practice: (1) the dynamics of the environment are accurately known; (2)
computational resources are suﬃcient to complete the calculation; and (3) the states
have the Markov property. For the kinds of tasks in which we are interested, one is
generally not able to implement this solution exactly because various combinations of
these assumptions are violated. For example, although the ﬁrst and third assumptions
present no problems for the game of backgammon, the second is a major impediment.
Because the game has about 1020 states, it would take thousands of years on today’s
fastest computers to solve the Bellman equation for v⇤, and the same is true for ﬁnding
q⇤. In reinforcement learning one typically has to settle for approximate solutions.
Many di↵erent decision-making methods can be viewed as ways of approximately
solving the Bellman optimality equation. For example, heuristic search methods can be
viewed as expanding the right-hand side of (3.19) several times, up to some depth, forming
a “tree” of possibilities, and then using a heuristic evaluation function to approximate
v⇤at the “leaf” nodes. (Heuristic search methods such as A⇤are almost always based
on the episodic case.) The methods of dynamic programming can be related even more
closely to the Bellman optimality equation. Many reinforcement learning methods can
be clearly understood as approximately solving the Bellman optimality equation, using
actual experienced transitions in place of knowledge of the expected transitions. We
consider a variety of such methods in the following chapters.
Exercise 3.20 Draw or describe the optimal state-value function for the golf example. ⇤
Exercise 3.21 Draw or describe the contours of the optimal action-value function for
putting, q⇤(s, putter), for the golf example.
⇤
+2
0
0
+1
left
right
Exercise 3.22 Consider the continuing MDP shown to the
right. The only decision to be made is that in the top state,
where two actions are available, left and right. The numbers
show the rewards that are received deterministically after
each action. There are exactly two deterministic policies,
⇡left and ⇡right. What policy is optimal if γ = 0? If γ = 0.9?
If γ = 0.5?
⇤


--- Page 89 ---

3.7. Optimality and Approximation
67
Exercise 3.23 Give the Bellman equation for q⇤for the recycling robot.
⇤
Exercise 3.24 Figure 3.5 gives the optimal value of the best state of the gridworld as
24.4, to one decimal place. Use your knowledge of the optimal policy and (3.8) to express
this value symbolically, and then to compute it to three decimal places.
⇤
Exercise 3.25 Give an equation for v⇤in terms of q⇤.
⇤
Exercise 3.26 Give an equation for q⇤in terms of v⇤and the four-argument p.
⇤
Exercise 3.27 Give an equation for ⇡⇤in terms of q⇤.
⇤
Exercise 3.28 Give an equation for ⇡⇤in terms of v⇤and the four-argument p.
⇤
Exercise 3.29 Rewrite the four Bellman equations for the four value functions (v⇡, v⇤, q⇡,
and q⇤) in terms of the three argument function p (3.4) and the two-argument function r
(3.5).
⇤
3.7
Optimality and Approximation
We have deﬁned optimal value functions and optimal policies. Clearly, an agent that
learns an optimal policy has done very well, but in practice this rarely happens. For
the kinds of tasks in which we are interested, optimal policies can be generated only
with extreme computational cost. A well-deﬁned notion of optimality organizes the
approach to learning we describe in this book and provides a way to understand the
theoretical properties of various learning algorithms, but it is an ideal that agents can
only approximate. As we discussed above, even if we have a complete and accurate model
of the environment’s dynamics, it is usually not possible to simply compute an optimal
policy by solving the Bellman optimality equation. For example, board games such as
chess are a tiny fraction of human experience, yet large, custom-designed computers still
cannot compute the optimal moves. A critical aspect of the problem facing the agent is
always the computational power available to it, in particular, the amount of computation
it can perform in a single time step.
The memory available is also an important constraint. A large amount of memory
is often required to build up approximations of value functions, policies, and models.
In tasks with small, ﬁnite state sets, it is possible to form these approximations using
arrays or tables with one entry for each state (or state–action pair). This we call the
tabular case, and the corresponding methods we call tabular methods. In many cases
of practical interest, however, there are far more states than could possibly be entries
in a table. In these cases the functions must be approximated, using some sort of more
compact parameterized function representation.
Our framing of the reinforcement learning problem forces us to settle for approxi-
mations. However, it also presents us with some unique opportunities for achieving
useful approximations.
For example, in approximating optimal behavior, there may be
many states that the agent faces with such a low probability that selecting suboptimal
actions for them has little impact on the amount of reward the agent receives. Tesauro’s
backgammon player, for example, plays with exceptional skill even though it might make


--- Page 90 ---

68
Chapter 3: Finite Markov Decision Processes
very bad decisions on board conﬁgurations that never occur in games against experts. In
fact, it is possible that TD-Gammon makes bad decisions for a large fraction of the game’s
state set. The online nature of reinforcement learning makes it possible to approximate
optimal policies in ways that put more e↵ort into learning to make good decisions for
frequently encountered states, at the expense of less e↵ort for infrequently encountered
states. This is one key property that distinguishes reinforcement learning from other
approaches to approximately solving MDPs.
3.8
Summary
Let us summarize the elements of the reinforcement learning problem that we have
presented in this chapter. Reinforcement learning is about learning from interaction
how to behave in order to achieve a goal. The reinforcement learning agent and its
environment interact over a sequence of discrete time steps. The speciﬁcation of their
interface deﬁnes a particular task: the actions are the choices made by the agent; the
states are the basis for making the choices; and the rewards are the basis for evaluating
the choices. Everything inside the agent is known and controllable. Its environment, on
the other hand, is incompletely controllable and may or may not be completely known.
A policy is a stochastic rule by which the agent selects actions as a function of states.
The agent’s objective is to maximize the amount of reward it receives over time.
When the reinforcement learning setup described above is formulated with well deﬁned
transition probabilities it constitutes a Markov decision process (MDP). A ﬁnite MDP is
an MDP with ﬁnite state, action, and (as we formulate it here) reward sets. Much of the
current theory of reinforcement learning is restricted to ﬁnite MDPs, but the methods
and ideas apply more generally.
The return is the function of future rewards that the agent seeks to maximize (in
expected value). It has several di↵erent deﬁnitions depending upon the nature of the
task and whether one wishes to discount delayed reward. The undiscounted formulation
is appropriate for episodic tasks, in which the agent–environment interaction breaks
naturally into episodes; the discounted formulation is appropriate for tabular continuing
tasks, in which the interaction does not naturally break into episodes but continues
without limit (but see Sections 10.3–4). We try to deﬁne the returns for the two kinds of
tasks such that one set of equations can apply to both the episodic and continuing cases.
A policy’s value functions (v⇡and q⇡) assign to each state, or state–action pair, the
expected return from that state, or state–action pair, given that the agent uses the
policy. The optimal value functions (v⇤and q⇤) assign to each state, or state–action pair,
the largest expected return achievable by any policy. A policy whose value functions
are optimal is an optimal policy. Whereas the optimal value functions for states and
state–action pairs are unique for a given MDP, there can be many optimal policies. Any
policy that is greedy with respect to the optimal value functions must be an optimal
policy. The Bellman optimality equations are special consistency conditions that the
optimal value functions must satisfy and that can, in principle, be solved for the optimal
value functions, from which an optimal policy can be determined with relative ease.


--- Page 91 ---

3.8. Summary
69
A reinforcement learning problem can be posed in a variety of di↵erent ways depending
on assumptions about the level of knowledge initially available to the agent. In problems
of complete knowledge, the agent has a complete and accurate model of the environment’s
dynamics. If the environment is an MDP, then such a model consists of the complete four-
argument dynamics function p (3.2). In problems of incomplete knowledge, a complete
and perfect model of the environment is not available.
Even if the agent had a complete and accurate environment model, the agent would
typically be unable to fully use it because of limitations on its memory and computation
per time step. In particular, extensive memory may be required to build up accurate
approximations of value functions, policies, and models. In most cases of practical interest
there are far more states than could possibly be entries in a table, and approximations
must be made.
A well-deﬁned notion of optimality organizes the approach to learning we describe in
this book and provides a way to understand the theoretical properties of various learning
algorithms, but it is an ideal that reinforcement learning agents can only approximate
to varying degrees. In reinforcement learning we are very much concerned with cases in
which optimal solutions cannot be found but must be approximated in some way.
Bibliographical and Historical Remarks
The reinforcement learning problem is deeply indebted to the idea of Markov decision
processes (MDPs) from the ﬁeld of optimal control. These historical inﬂuences and other
major inﬂuences from psychology are described in the brief history given in Chapter 1.
Reinforcement learning adds to MDPs a focus on approximation and incomplete infor-
mation for realistically large problems. MDPs and the reinforcement learning problem
are only weakly linked to traditional learning and decision-making problems in artiﬁcial
intelligence. However, artiﬁcial intelligence is now vigorously exploring MDP formulations
for planning and decision making from a variety of perspectives. MDPs are more general
than previous formulations used in artiﬁcial intelligence in that they permit more general
kinds of goals and uncertainty.
The theory of MDPs is treated by, for example, Bertsekas (2005), White (1969), Whittle
(1982, 1983), and Puterman (1994). A particularly compact treatment of the ﬁnite case
is given by Ross (1983). MDPs are also studied under the heading of stochastic optimal
control, where adaptive optimal control methods are most closely related to reinforcement
learning (e.g., Kumar, 1985; Kumar and Varaiya, 1986).
The theory of MDPs evolved from e↵orts to understand the problem of making sequences
of decisions under uncertainty, where each decision can depend on the previous decisions
and their outcomes. It is sometimes called the theory of multistage decision processes,
or sequential decision processes, and has roots in the statistical literature on sequential
sampling beginning with the papers by Thompson (1933, 1934) and Robbins (1952) that
we cited in Chapter 2 in connection with bandit problems (which are prototypical MDPs
if formulated as multiple-situation problems).
The earliest instance (that we are aware of) in which reinforcement learning was
discussed using the MDP formalism is Andreae’s (1969) description of a uniﬁed view of


--- Page 92 ---

70
Chapter 3: Finite Markov Decision Processes
learning machines. Witten and Corbin (1973) experimented with a reinforcement learning
system later analyzed by Witten (1977, 1976a) using the MDP formalism. Although
he did not explicitly mention MDPs, Werbos (1977) suggested approximate solution
methods for stochastic optimal control problems that are related to modern reinforcement
learning methods (see also Werbos, 1982, 1987, 1988, 1989, 1992). Although Werbos’s
ideas were not widely recognized at the time, they were prescient in emphasizing the
importance of approximately solving optimal control problems in a variety of domains,
including artiﬁcial intelligence. The most inﬂuential integration of reinforcement learning
and MDPs is due to Watkins (1989).
3.1
Our characterization of the dynamics of an MDP in terms of p(s0, r|s, a) is
slightly unusual. It is more common in the MDP literature to describe the
dynamics in terms of the state transition probabilities p(s0|s, a) and expected
next rewards r(s, a). In reinforcement learning, however, we more often have
to refer to individual actual or sample rewards (rather than just their expected
values). Our notation also makes it plainer that St and Rt are in general jointly
determined, and thus must have the same time index. In teaching reinforcement
learning, we have found our notation to be more straightforward conceptually
and easier to understand.
For a good intuitive discussion of the system-theoretic concept of state, see
Minsky (1967).
The bioreactor example is based on the work of Ungar (1990) and Miller and
Williams (1992). The recycling robot example was inspired by the can-collecting
robot built by Jonathan Connell (1989). Kober and Peters (2012) present a
collection of robotics applications of reinforcement learning.
3.2
An explicit statement of the reward hypothesis was suggested by Michael Littman
(personal communication).
3.3–4
The terminology of episodic and continuing tasks is di↵erent from that usually
used in the MDP literature.
In that literature it is common to distinguish
three types of tasks: (1) ﬁnite-horizon tasks, in which interaction terminates
after a particular ﬁxed number of time steps; (2) indeﬁnite-horizon tasks, in
which interaction can last arbitrarily long but must eventually terminate; and
(3) inﬁnite-horizon tasks, in which interaction does not terminate. Our episodic
and continuing tasks are similar to indeﬁnite-horizon and inﬁnite-horizon tasks,
respectively, but we prefer to emphasize the di↵erence in the nature of the
interaction. This di↵erence seems more fundamental than the di↵erence in the
objective functions emphasized by the usual terms. Often episodic tasks use
an indeﬁnite-horizon objective function and continuing tasks an inﬁnite-horizon
objective function, but we see this as a common coincidence rather than a
fundamental di↵erence.
The pole-balancing example is from Michie and Chambers (1968) and Barto,
Sutton, and Anderson (1983).


--- Page 93 ---

3.8. Summary
71
3.5–6
Assigning value on the basis of what is good or bad in the long run has ancient
roots.
In control theory, mapping states to numerical values representing the
long-term consequences of control decisions is a key part of optimal control theory,
which was developed in the 1950s by extending nineteenth century state-function
theories of classical mechanics (see, for example, Schultz and Melsa, 1967). In
describing how a computer could be programmed to play chess, Shannon (1950)
suggested using an evaluation function that took into account the long-term
advantages and disadvantages of chess positions.
Watkins’s (1989) Q-learning algorithm for estimating q⇤(Chapter 6) made action-
value functions an important part of reinforcement learning, and consequently
these functions are often called “Q-functions.” But the idea of an action-value
function is much older than this. Shannon (1950) suggested that a function
h(P, M) could be used by a chess-playing program to decide whether a move M
in position P is worth exploring. Michie’s (1961, 1963) MENACE system and
Michie and Chambers’s (1968) BOXES system can be understood as estimating
action-value functions. In classical physics, Hamilton’s principal function is
an action-value function; Newtonian dynamics are greedy with respect to this
function (e.g., Goldstein, 1957). Action-value functions also played a central role
in Denardo’s (1967) theoretical treatment of dynamic programming in terms of
contraction mappings.
The Bellman optimality equation (for v⇤) was popularized by Richard Bellman
(1957a), who called it the “basic functional equation.” The counterpart of the
Bellman optimality equation for continuous time and state problems is known
as the Hamilton–Jacobi–Bellman equation (or often just the Hamilton–Jacobi
equation), indicating its roots in classical physics (e.g., Schultz and Melsa, 1967).
The golf example was suggested by Chris Watkins.

