============================================================
 Chapter 11 - Off-policy Methods with Approximation
 (PDF pages 279-308)
============================================================

--- Page 279 ---

Chapter 11
*O↵-policy Methods with
Approximation
This book has treated on-policy and o↵-policy learning methods since Chapter 5 primarily
as two alternative ways of handling the conﬂict between exploitation and exploration
inherent in learning forms of generalized policy iteration. The two chapters preceding this
have treated the on-policy case with function approximation, and in this chapter we treat
the o↵-policy case with function approximation. The extension to function approximation
turns out to be signiﬁcantly di↵erent and harder for o↵-policy learning than it is for
on-policy learning. The tabular o↵-policy methods developed in Chapters 6 and 7 readily
extend to semi-gradient algorithms, but these algorithms do not converge as robustly as
they do under on-policy training. In this chapter we explore the convergence problems,
take a closer look at the theory of linear function approximation, introduce a notion of
learnability, and then discuss new algorithms with stronger convergence guarantees for the
o↵-policy case. In the end we will have improved methods, but the theoretical results will
not be as strong, nor the empirical results as satisfying, as they are for on-policy learning.
Along the way, we will gain a deeper understanding of approximation in reinforcement
learning for on-policy learning as well as o↵-policy learning.
Recall that in o↵-policy learning we seek to learn a value function for a target policy
⇡, given data due to a di↵erent behavior policy b. In the prediction case, both policies
are static and given, and we seek to learn either state values ˆv ⇡v⇡or action values
ˆq ⇡q⇡. In the control case, action values are learned, and both policies typically change
during learning—⇡being the greedy policy with respect to ˆq, and b being something
more exploratory such as the "-greedy policy with respect to ˆq.
The challenge of o↵-policy learning can be divided into two parts, one that arises in
the tabular case and one that arises only with function approximation. The ﬁrst part
of the challenge has to do with the target of the update (not to be confused with the
target policy), and the second part has to do with the distribution of the updates. The
techniques related to importance sampling developed in Chapters 5 and 7 deal with
the ﬁrst part; these may increase variance but are needed in all successful algorithms,


--- Page 280 ---

258
Chapter 11: O↵-policy Methods with Approximation
tabular and approximate. The extension of these techniques to function approximation
are quickly dealt with in the ﬁrst section of this chapter.
Something more is needed for the second part of the challenge of o↵-policy learning
with function approximation because the distribution of updates in the o↵-policy case is
not according to the on-policy distribution. The on-policy distribution is important to
the stability of semi-gradient methods. Two general approaches have been explored to
deal with this. One is to use importance sampling methods again, this time to warp the
update distribution back to the on-policy distribution, so that semi-gradient methods
are guaranteed to converge (in the linear case). The other is to develop true gradient
methods that do not rely on any special distribution for stability. We present methods
based on both approaches. This is a cutting-edge research area, and it is not clear which
of these approaches is most e↵ective in practice.
11.1
Semi-gradient Methods
We begin by describing how the methods developed in earlier chapters for the o↵-
policy case extend readily to function approximation as semi-gradient methods. These
methods address the ﬁrst part of the challenge of o↵-policy learning (changing the update
targets) but not the second part (changing the update distribution). Accordingly, these
methods may diverge in some cases, and in that sense are not sound, but still they
are often successfully used. Remember that these methods are guaranteed stable and
asymptotically unbiased for the tabular case, which corresponds to a special case of
function approximation. So it may still be possible to combine them with feature selection
methods in such a way that the combined system could be assured stable. In any event,
these methods are simple and thus a good place to start.
In Chapter 7 we described a variety of tabular o↵-policy algorithms. To convert them
to semi-gradient form, we simply replace the update to an array (V or Q) to an update
to a weight vector (w), using the approximate value function (ˆv or ˆq) and its gradient.
Many of these algorithms use the per-step importance sampling ratio:
⇢t .= ⇢t:t = ⇡(At|St)
b(At|St) .
(11.1)
For example, the one-step, state-value algorithm is semi-gradient o↵-policy TD(0), which
is just like the corresponding on-policy algorithm (page 203) except for the addition of
⇢t:
wt+1 .= wt + ↵⇢tδtrˆv(St,wt),
(11.2)
where δt is deﬁned appropriately depending on whether the problem is episodic and
discounted, or continuing and undiscounted using average reward:
δt .= Rt+1 + γˆv(St+1,wt) −ˆv(St,wt), or
(11.3)
δt .= Rt+1 −¯Rt + ˆv(St+1,wt) −ˆv(St,wt).
(11.4)


--- Page 281 ---

11.1. Semi-gradient Methods
259
For action values, the one-step algorithm is semi-gradient Expected Sarsa:
wt+1 .= wt + ↵δtrˆq(St, At, wt), with
(11.5)
δt .= Rt+1 + γ
X
a
⇡(a|St+1)ˆq(St+1, a, wt) −ˆq(St, At, wt), or
(episodic)
δt .= Rt+1 −¯Rt +
X
a
⇡(a|St+1)ˆq(St+1, a, wt) −ˆq(St, At, wt).
(continuing)
Note that this algorithm does not use importance sampling. In the tabular case it is clear
that this is appropriate because the only sample action is At, and in learning its value we
do not have to consider any other actions. With function approximation it is less clear
because we might want to weight di↵erent state–action pairs di↵erently once they all
contribute to the same overall approximation. Proper resolution of this issue awaits a
more thorough understanding of the theory of function approximation in reinforcement
learning.
In the multi-step generalizations of these algorithms, both the state-value and action-
value algorithms involve importance sampling. The n-step version of semi-gradient Sarsa
is
wt+n .= wt+n−1+↵⇢t+1 · · · ⇢t+n [Gt:t+n −ˆq(St, At, wt+n−1)] rˆq(St, At, wt+n−1) (11.6)
with
Gt:t+n .= Rt+1 + · · · + γn−1Rt+n + γnˆq(St+n, At+n, wt+n−1), or
(episodic)
Gt:t+n .= Rt+1 −¯Rt + · · · + Rt+n −¯Rt+n−1 + ˆq(St+n, At+n, wt+n−1), (continuing)
where here we are being slightly informal in our treatment of the ends of episodes. In the
ﬁrst equation, the ⇢ks for k ≥T (where T is the last time step of the episode) should be
taken to be 1, and Gt:t+n should be taken to be Gt if t + n ≥T.
Recall that we also presented in Chapter 7 an o↵-policy algorithm that does not involve
importance sampling at all: the n-step tree-backup algorithm. Here is its semi-gradient
version:
wt+n .= wt+n−1 + ↵[Gt:t+n −ˆq(St, At, wt+n−1)] rˆq(St, At, wt+n−1),
(11.7)
Gt:t+n .= ˆq(St, At, wt+n−1) +
t+n−1
X
k=t
δk
k
Y
i=t+1
γ⇡(Ai|Si),
(11.8)
with δt as deﬁned at the top of this page for Expected Sarsa. We also deﬁned in Chapter 7
an algorithm that uniﬁes all action-value algorithms: n-step Q(σ). We leave the semi-
gradient form of that algorithm, and also of the n-step state-value algorithm, as exercises
for the reader.
Exercise 11.1 Convert the equation of n-step o↵-policy TD (7.9) to semi-gradient form.
Give accompanying deﬁnitions of the return for both the episodic and continuing cases. ⇤
⇤Exercise 11.2 Convert the equations of n-step Q(σ) (7.11 and 7.17) to semi-gradient
form. Give deﬁnitions that cover both the episodic and continuing cases.
⇤


--- Page 282 ---

260
Chapter 11: O↵-policy Methods with Approximation
11.2
Examples of O↵-policy Divergence
In this section we begin to discuss the second part of the challenge of o↵-policy learning
with function approximation—that the distribution of updates does not match the on-
policy distribution. We describe some instructive counterexamples to o↵-policy learning—
cases where semi-gradient and other simple algorithms are unstable and diverge.
To establish intuitions, it is best to consider ﬁrst a very simple example. Suppose,
perhaps as part of a larger MDP, there are two states whose estimated values are of
the functional form w and 2w, where the parameter vector w consists of only a single
component w. This occurs under linear function approximation if the feature vectors
for the two states are each simple numbers (single-component vectors), in this case 1
and 2. In the ﬁrst state, only one action is available, and it results deterministically in a
transition to the second state with a reward of 0:
2w
0
2w
where the expressions inside the two circles indicate the two state’s values.
Suppose initially w = 10. The transition will then be from a state of estimated value
10 to a state of estimated value 20. It will look like a good transition, and w will be
increased to raise the ﬁrst state’s estimated value. If γ is nearly 1, then the TD error will
be nearly 10, and, if ↵= 0.1, then w will be increased to nearly 11 in trying to reduce the
TD error. However, the second state’s estimated value will also be increased, to nearly
22. If the transition occurs again, then it will be from a state of estimated value ⇡11 to
a state of estimated value ⇡22, for a TD error of ⇡11—larger, not smaller, than before.
It will look even more like the ﬁrst state is undervalued, and its value will be increased
again, this time to ⇡12.1. This looks bad, and in fact with further updates w will diverge
to inﬁnity.
To see this deﬁnitively we have to look more carefully at the sequence of updates. The
TD error on a transition between the two states is
δt = Rt+1 + γˆv(St+1,wt) −ˆv(St,wt) = 0 + γ2wt −wt = (2γ −1)wt,
and the o↵-policy semi-gradient TD(0) update (from (11.2)) is
wt+1 = wt + ↵⇢tδtrˆv(St,wt) = wt + ↵· 1 · (2γ −1)wt · 1 =
#
1 + ↵(2γ −1)
$
wt.
Note that the importance sampling ratio, ⇢t, is 1 on this transition because there is
only one action available from the ﬁrst state, so its probabilities of being taken under
the target and behavior policies must both be 1. In the ﬁnal update above, the new
parameter is the old parameter times a scalar constant, 1 + ↵(2γ −1). If this constant is
greater than 1, then the system is unstable and w will go to positive or negative inﬁnity
depending on its initial value. Here this constant is greater than 1 whenever γ > 0.5.
Note that stability does not depend on the speciﬁc step size, as long as ↵> 0. Smaller or
larger step sizes would a↵ect the rate at which w goes to inﬁnity, but not whether it goes
there or not.
Key to this example is that the one transition occurs repeatedly without w being
updated on other transitions. This is possible under o↵-policy training because the


--- Page 283 ---

11.2. Examples of O↵-policy Divergence
261
behavior policy might select actions on those other transitions which the target policy
never would. For these transitions, ⇢t would be zero and no update would be made.
Under on-policy training, however, ⇢t is always one. Each time there is a transition from
the w state to the 2w state, increasing w, there would also have to be a transition out
of the 2w state. That transition would reduce w, unless it were to a state whose value
was higher (because γ < 1) than 2w, and then that state would have to be followed by a
state of even higher value, or else again w would be reduced. Each state can support the
one before only by creating a higher expectation. Eventually the piper must be paid. In
the on-policy case the promise of future reward must be kept and the system is kept in
check. But in the o↵-policy case, a promise can be made and then, after taking an action
that the target policy never would, forgotten and forgiven.
This simple example communicates much of the reason why o↵-policy training can lead
to divergence, but it is not completely convincing because it is not complete—it is just a
fragment of a complete MDP. Can there really be a complete system with instability? A
simple complete example of divergence is Baird’s counterexample. Consider the episodic
seven-state, two-action MDP shown in Figure 11.1. The dashed action takes the system
to one of the six upper states with equal probability, whereas the solid action takes the
system to the seventh state. The behavior policy b selects the dashed and solid actions
with probabilities 6
7 and 1
7, so that the next-state distribution under it is uniform (the
same for all nonterminal states), which is also the starting distribution for each episode.
The target policy ⇡always takes the solid action, and so the on-policy distribution (for ⇡)
is concentrated in the seventh state. The reward is zero on all transitions. The discount
rate is γ = 0.99.
Consider estimating the state-value under the linear parameterization indicated by
the expression shown in each state circle. For example, the estimated value of the
leftmost state is 2w1 +w8, where the subscript corresponds to the component of the
2w2+w8
2w1+w8
2w3+w8
2w4+w8
2w5+w8
2w6+w8
w7+2w8
b(dashed|·) = 6/7
b(solid|·) = 1/7
⇡(solid|·) = 1
γ = 0.99
Figure 11.1: Baird’s counterexample. The approximate state-value function for this Markov
process is of the form shown by the linear expressions inside each state. The solid action usually
results in the seventh state, and the dashed action usually results in one of the other six states,
each with equal probability. The reward is always zero.


--- Page 284 ---

262
Chapter 11: O↵-policy Methods with Approximation
overall weight vector w 2 R8; this corresponds to a feature vector for the ﬁrst state
being x(1) = (2, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 1)>. The reward is zero on all transitions, so the true value
function is v⇡(s) = 0, for all s, which can be exactly approximated if w = 0. In fact,
there are many solutions, as there are more components to the weight vector (8) than
there are nonterminal states (7). Moreover, the set of feature vectors, {x(s) : s 2 S}, is
a linearly independent set. In all these ways this task seems a favorable case for linear
function approximation.
If we apply semi-gradient TD(0) to this problem (11.2), then the weights diverge
to inﬁnity, as shown in Figure 11.2 (left). The instability occurs for any positive step
size, no matter how small. In fact, it even occurs if an expected update is done as in
dynamic programming (DP), as shown in Figure 11.2 (right). That is, if the weight
vector, wk, is updated for all states at the same time in a semi-gradient way, using the
DP (expectation-based) target:
wk+1 .= wk + ↵
|S|
X
s
⇣
E⇡[Rt+1 + γˆv(St+1,wk) | St =s] −ˆv(s,wk)
⌘
rˆv(s,wk). (11.9)
In this case, there is no randomness and no asynchrony, just as in a classical DP update.
The method is conventional except in its use of semi-gradient function approximation.
Yet still the system is unstable.
If we alter just the distribution of DP updates in Baird’s counterexample, from the
uniform distribution to the on-policy distribution (which generally requires asynchronous
updating), then convergence is guaranteed to a solution with error bounded by (9.14).
This example is striking because the TD and DP methods used are arguably the simplest
w8
w8
300
200
100
101
1000
0
1000
0
w1– w6
Steps
w7
Sweeps
Semi-gradient Off-policy TD
Semi-gradient DP
w1– w6
w7
Figure 11.2: Demonstration of instability on Baird’s counterexample. Shown are the evolution
of the components of the parameter vector w of the two semi-gradient algorithms. The step size
was ↵= 0.01, and the initial weights were w = (1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 10, 1)>.


--- Page 285 ---

11.2. Examples of O↵-policy Divergence
263
and best-understood bootstrapping methods, and the linear, semi-descent method used is
arguably the simplest and best-understood kind of function approximation. The example
shows that even the simplest combination of bootstrapping and function approximation
can be unstable if the updates are not done according to the on-policy distribution.
There are also counterexamples similar to Baird’s showing divergence for Q-learning.
This is cause for concern because otherwise Q-learning has the best convergence guarantees
of all control methods. Considerable e↵ort has gone into trying to ﬁnd a remedy to
this problem or to obtain some weaker, but still workable, guarantee. For example, it
may be possible to guarantee convergence of Q-learning as long as the behavior policy is
suﬃciently close to the target policy, for example, when it is the "-greedy policy. To the
best of our knowledge, Q-learning has never been found to diverge in this case, but there
has been no theoretical analysis. In the rest of this section we present several other ideas
that have been explored.
Suppose that instead of taking just a step toward the expected one-step return on each
iteration, as in Baird’s counterexample, we actually change the value function all the way
to the best, least-squares approximation. Would this solve the instability problem? Of
course it would if the feature vectors, {x(s) : s 2 S}, formed a linearly independent set,
as they do in Baird’s counterexample, because then exact approximation is possible on
each iteration and the method reduces to standard tabular DP. But of course the point
here is to consider the case when an exact solution is not possible. In this case stability
is not guaranteed even when forming the best approximation at each iteration, as shown
in the example.
Example 11.1: Tsitsiklis and Van Roy’s Counterexample This example shows
that linear function approximation would not work with DP even if the least-squares
1 −"
"
w
2w
solution was found at each step. The counterexample is formed
by extending the w-to-2w example (from earlier in this section)
with a terminal state, as shown to the right. As before, the
estimated value of the ﬁrst state is w, and the estimated value
of the second state is 2w. The reward is zero on all transitions,
so the true values are zero at both states, which is exactly
representable with w = 0. If we set wk+1 at each step so
as to minimize the VE between the estimated value and the
expected one-step return, then we have
wk+1
=
argmin
w2R
X
s2S
⇣
ˆv(s,w) −E⇡
⇥
Rt+1 + γˆv(St+1,wk)
44 St = s
⇤⌘2
=
argmin
w2R
#
w −γ2wk
$2 +
#
2w −(1 −")γ2wk
$2
=
6 −4"
5
γwk.
(11.10)
The sequence {wk} diverges when γ >
5
6−4" and w0 6= 0.


--- Page 286 ---

264
Chapter 11: O↵-policy Methods with Approximation
Another way to try to prevent instability is to use special methods for function
approximation. In particular, stability is guaranteed for function approximation methods
that do not extrapolate from the observed targets. These methods, called averagers,
include nearest neighbor methods and locally weighted regression, but not popular
methods such as tile coding and artiﬁcial neural networks (ANNs).
Exercise 11.3 (programming) Apply one-step semi-gradient Q-learning to Baird’s coun-
terexample and show empirically that its weights diverge.
⇤
11.3
The Deadly Triad
Our discussion so far can be summarized by saying that the danger of instability and
divergence arises whenever we combine all of the following three elements, making up
what we call the deadly triad:
Function approximation A powerful, scalable way of generalizing from a state space
much larger than the memory and computational resources (e.g., linear function
approximation or ANNs).
Bootstrapping Update targets that include existing estimates (as in dynamic pro-
gramming or TD methods) rather than relying exclusively on actual rewards and
complete returns (as in MC methods).
O↵-policy training Training on a distribution of transitions other than that produced
by the target policy. Sweeping through the state space and updating all states
uniformly, as in dynamic programming, does not respect the target policy and is
an example of o↵-policy training.
In particular, note that the danger is not due to control or to generalized policy iteration.
Those cases are more complex to analyze, but the instability arises in the simpler prediction
case whenever it includes all three elements of the deadly triad. The danger is also not
due to learning or to uncertainties about the environment, because it occurs just as
strongly in planning methods, such as dynamic programming, in which the environment
is completely known.
If any two elements of the deadly triad are present, but not all three, then instability
can be avoided. It is natural, then, to go through the three and see if there is any one
that can be given up.
Of the three, function approximation most clearly cannot be given up. We need
methods that scale to large problems and to great expressive power. We need at least
linear function approximation with many features and parameters. State aggregation or
nonparametric methods whose complexity grows with data are too weak or too expensive.
Least-squares methods such as LSTD are of quadratic complexity and are therefore too
expensive for large problems.
Doing without bootstrapping is possible, at the cost of computational and data eﬃciency.
Perhaps most important are the losses in computational eﬃciency. Monte Carlo (non-
bootstrapping) methods require memory to save everything that happens between making


--- Page 287 ---

11.3. The Deadly Triad
265
each prediction and obtaining the ﬁnal return, and all their computation is done once the
ﬁnal return is obtained. The cost of these computational issues is not apparent on serial
von Neumann computers, but would be on specialized hardware. With bootstrapping and
eligibility traces (Chapter 12), data can be dealt with when and where it is generated,
then need never be used again. The savings in communication and memory made possible
by bootstrapping are great.
The losses in data eﬃciency by giving up bootstrapping are also signiﬁcant.
We
have seen this repeatedly, such as in Chapters 7 (Figure 7.2) and 9 (Figure 9.2), where
some degree of bootstrapping performed much better than Monte Carlo methods on
the random-walk prediction task, and in Chapter 10 where the same was seen on the
Mountain-Car control task (Figure 10.4). Many other problems show much faster learning
with bootstrapping (e.g., see Figure 12.14). Bootstrapping often results in faster learning
because it allows learning to take advantage of the state property, the ability to recognize
a state upon returning to it. On the other hand, bootstrapping can impair learning on
problems where the state representation is poor and causes poor generalization (e.g.,
this seems to be the case on Tetris, see S¸im¸sek, Alg´orta, and Kothiyal, 2016). A poor
state representation can also result in bias; this is the reason for the poorer bound on
the asymptotic approximation quality of bootstrapping methods (Equation 9.14). On
balance, the ability to bootstrap has to be considered extremely valuable. One may
sometimes choose not to use it by selecting long n-step updates (or a large bootstrapping
parameter, λ ⇡1; see Chapter 12) but often bootstrapping greatly increases eﬃciency. It
is an ability that we would very much like to keep in our toolkit.
Finally, there is o↵-policy learning; can we give that up? On-policy methods are often
adequate. For model-free reinforcement learning, one can simply use Sarsa rather than
Q-learning. O↵-policy methods free behavior from the target policy. This could be
considered an appealing convenience but not a necessity. However, o↵-policy learning
is essential to other anticipated use cases, cases that we have not yet mentioned in this
book but may be important to the larger goal of creating a powerful intelligent agent.
In these use cases, the agent learns not just a single value function and single policy,
but large numbers of them in parallel. There is extensive psychological evidence that
people and animals learn to predict many di↵erent sensory events, not just rewards. We
can be surprised by unusual events, and correct our predictions about them, even if
they are of neutral valence (neither good nor bad). This kind of prediction presumably
underlies predictive models of the world such as are used in planning. We predict what
we will see after eye movements, how long it will take to walk home, the probability of
making a jump shot in basketball, and the satisfaction we will get from taking on a new
project. In all these cases, the events we would like to predict depend on our acting in
a certain way. To learn them all, in parallel, requires learning from the one stream of
experience. There are many target policies, and thus the one behavior policy cannot
equal all of them. Yet parallel learning is conceptually possible because the behavior
policy may overlap in part with many of the target policies. To take full advantage of
this requires o↵-policy learning.


--- Page 288 ---

266
Chapter 11: O↵-policy Methods with Approximation
11.4
Linear Value-function Geometry
To better understand the stability challenge of o↵-policy learning, it is helpful to think
about value function approximation more abstractly and independently of how learning
is done. We can imagine the space of all possible state-value functions—all functions
from states to real numbers v : S ! R. Most of these value functions do not correspond
to any policy. More important for our purposes is that most are not representable by the
function approximator, which by design has far fewer parameters than there are states.
Given an enumeration of the state space S = {s1, s2, . . . , s|S|}, any value function v
corresponds to a vector listing the value of each state in order [v(s1), v(s2), . . . , v(s|S|)]>.
This vector representation of a value function has as many components as there are
states. In most cases where we want to use function approximation, this would be far
too many components to represent the vector explicitly. Nevertheless, the idea of this
vector is conceptually useful. In the following, we treat a value function and its vector
representation interchangeably.
To develop intuitions, consider the case with three states S = {s1, s2, s3} and two
parameters w = (w1, w2)>. We can then view all value functions/vectors as points in
a three-dimensional space. The parameters provide an alternative coordinate system
over a two-dimensional subspace. Any weight vector w = (w1, w2)> is a point in the
two-dimensional subspace and thus also a complete value function vw that assigns values
to all three states. With general function approximation the relationship between the
full space and the subspace of representable functions could be complex, but in the case
of linear value-function approximation the subspace is a simple plane, as suggested by
Figure 11.3.
Now consider a single ﬁxed policy ⇡. We assume that its true value function, v⇡, is too
complex to be represented exactly as an approximation. Thus v⇡is not in the subspace;
in the ﬁgure it is depicted as being above the planar subspace of representable functions.
If v⇡cannot be represented exactly, what representable value function is closest to
it? This turns out to be a subtle question with multiple answers. To begin, we need
a measure of the distance between two value functions. Given two value functions v1
and v2, we can talk about the vector di↵erence between them, v = v1 −v2. If v is small,
then the two value functions are close to each other. But how are we to measure the size
of this di↵erence vector? The conventional Euclidean norm is not appropriate because,
as discussed in Section 9.2, some states are more important than others because they
occur more frequently or because we are more interested in them (Section 9.11). As
in Section 9.2, let us use the distribution µ : S ! [0, 1] to specify the degree to which
we care about di↵erent states being accurately valued (often taken to be the on-policy
distribution). We can then deﬁne the distance between value functions using the norm
kvk2
µ
.=
X
s2S
µ(s)v(s)2.
(11.11)
Note that the VE from Section 9.2 can be written simply using this norm as VE(w) =
kvw −v⇡k2
µ. For any value function v, the operation of ﬁnding its closest value function
in the subspace of representable value functions is a projection operation. We deﬁne a


--- Page 289 ---

11.4. Linear Value-function Geometry
267
v⇡
The subspace of all value functions representable as 
Bellman error vector (BE)
⇧v⇡= vθ⇤
VE
PBE(
Value error (VE)
w1
w2
vw
vw
B⇡vw
⇧B⇡vw
wTD
PBE = ⃗0
The 3D space of 
all value functions 
over 3 states
min BE
min TDE
(min VE)
Figure 11.3:
The geometry of linear value-function approximation.
Shown is the three-
dimensional space of all value functions over three states, while shown as a plane is the subspace of
all value functions representable by a linear function approximator with parameter w = (w1, w2)>.
The true value function v⇡is in the larger space and can be projected down (into the subspace,
using a projection operator ⇧) to its best approximation in the value error (VE) sense. The
best approximators in the Bellman error (BE), projected Bellman error (PBE), and temporal
di↵erence error (TDE) senses are all potentially di↵erent and are shown in the lower right. (VE,
BE, and PBE are all treated as the corresponding vectors in this ﬁgure.) The Bellman operator
takes a value function in the plane to one outside, which can then be projected back. If you
iteratively applied the Bellman operator outside the space (shown in gray above) you would
reach the true value function, as in conventional dynamic programming. If instead you kept
projecting back into the subspace at each step, as in the lower step shown in gray, then the ﬁxed
point would be the point of vector-zero PBE.
projection operator ⇧that takes an arbitrary value function to the representable function
that is closest in our norm:
⇧v .= vw where w = argmin
w2Rd kv −vwk2
µ .
(11.12)
The representable value function that is closest to the true value function v⇡is thus its
projection, ⇧v⇡, as suggested in Figure 11.3. This is the solution asymptotically found
by Monte Carlo methods, albeit often very slowly. The projection operation is discussed
more fully in the box on the next page.
TD methods ﬁnd di↵erent solutions. To understand their rationale, recall that the
Bellman equation for value function v⇡is
v⇡(s) =
X
a
⇡(a|s)
X
s0,r
p(s0, r|s, a) [r + γv⇡(s0)] ,
for all s 2 S.
(11.16)


--- Page 290 ---

268
Chapter 11: O↵-policy Methods with Approximation
The projection matrix
For a linear function approximator, the projection operation is linear, which implies
that it can be represented as an |S| ⇥|S| matrix:
⇧.= X
#
X>DX
$−1 X>D,
(11.13)
where, as in Section 9.4, D denotes the |S| ⇥|S| diagonal matrix with the µ(s)
on the diagonal, and X denotes the |S| ⇥d matrix whose rows are the feature
vectors x(s)>, one for each state s. If the inverse in (11.13) does not exist, then the
pseudoinverse is substituted. Using these matrices, the squared norm of a vector
can be written
kvk2
µ = v>Dv,
(11.14)
and the approximate linear value function can be written
vw = Xw.
(11.15)
The true value function v⇡is the only value function that solves (11.16) exactly. If an
approximate value function vw were substituted for v⇡, the di↵erence between the right
and left sides of the modiﬁed equation could be used as a measure of how far o↵vw is
from v⇡. We call this the Bellman error at state s:
¯δw(s) .=
0
@X
a
⇡(a|s)
X
s0,r
p(s0, r|s, a) [r + γvw(s0)]
1
A −vw(s)
(11.17)
= E⇡
⇥
Rt+1 + γvw(St+1) −vw(St)
44 St = s, At ⇠⇡
⇤
,
(11.18)
which shows clearly the relationship of the Bellman error to the TD error (11.3). The
Bellman error is the expectation of the TD error.
The vector of all the Bellman errors, at all states, ¯δw 2 R|S|, is called the Bellman
error vector (shown as BE in Figure 11.3). The overall size of this vector, in the norm, is
an overall measure of the error in the value function, called the mean square Bellman
error:
BE(w) =
&&¯δw
&&2
µ .
(11.19)
It is not possible in general to reduce the BE to zero (at which point vw = v⇡), but for
linear function approximation there is a unique value of w for which the BE is minimized.
This point in the representable-function subspace (labeled min BE in Figure 11.3) is
di↵erent in general from that which minimizes the VE (shown as ⇧v⇡). Methods that
seek to minimize the BE are discussed in the next two sections.
The Bellman error vector is shown in Figure 11.3 as the result of applying the Bellman
operator B⇡: R|S| ! R|S| to the approximate value function. The Bellman operator is


--- Page 291 ---

11.5. Gradient Descent in the Bellman Error
269
deﬁned by
(B⇡v)(s) .=
X
a
⇡(a|s)
X
s0,r
p(s0, r|s, a) [r + γv(s0)] ,
(11.20)
for all s 2 S, v : S ! R. The Bellman error vector for vw can be written ¯δw = B⇡vw −vw.
If the Bellman operator is applied to a value function in the representable subspace,
then, in general, it will produce a new value function that is outside the subspace, as
suggested in the ﬁgure. In dynamic programming (without function approximation), this
operator is applied repeatedly to the points outside the representable space, as suggested
by the gray arrows in the top of Figure 11.3. Eventually that process converges to the
true value function v⇡, the only ﬁxed point for the Bellman operator, the only value
function for which
v⇡= B⇡v⇡,
(11.21)
which is just another way of writing the Bellman equation for ⇡(11.16).
With function approximation, however, the intermediate value functions lying outside
the subspace cannot be represented. The gray arrows in the upper part of Figure 11.3
cannot be followed because after the ﬁrst update (dark line) the value function must
be projected back into something representable. The next iteration then begins within
the subspace; the value function is again taken outside of the subspace by the Bellman
operator and then mapped back by the projection operator, as suggested by the lower
gray arrow and line. Following these arrows is a DP-like process with approximation.
In this case we are interested in the projection of the Bellman error vector back into
the representable space. This is the projected Bellman error vector ⇧¯δw, shown in
Figure 11.3 as PBE. The size of this vector, in the norm, is another measure of error in
the approximate value function. For any approximate value function vw, we deﬁne the
mean square Projected Bellman error, denoted PBE, as
PBE(w) =
&&⇧¯δw
&&2
µ .
(11.22)
With linear function approximation there always exists an approximate value function
(within the subspace) with zero PBE; this is the TD ﬁxed point, wTD, introduced in
Section 9.4. As we have seen, this point is not always stable under semi-gradient TD
methods and o↵-policy training. As shown in the ﬁgure, this value function is generally
di↵erent from those minimizing VE or BE. Methods that are guaranteed to converge to
it are discussed in Sections 11.7 and 11.8.
11.5
Gradient Descent in the Bellman Error
Armed with a better understanding of value function approximation and its various
objectives, we return now to the challenge of stability in o↵-policy learning. We would
like to apply the approach of stochastic gradient descent (SGD, Section 9.3), in which
updates are made that in expectation are equal to the negative gradient of an objective


--- Page 292 ---

270
Chapter 11: O↵-policy Methods with Approximation
function. These methods always go downhill (in expectation) in the objective and because
of this are typically stable with excellent convergence properties. Among the algorithms
investigated so far in this book, only the Monte Carlo methods are true SGD methods.
These methods converge robustly under both on-policy and o↵-policy training as well
as for general nonlinear (di↵erentiable) function approximators, though they are often
slower than semi-gradient methods with bootstrapping, which are not SGD methods.
Semi-gradient methods may diverge under o↵-policy training, as we have seen earlier in
this chapter, and under contrived cases of nonlinear function approximation (Tsitsiklis
and Van Roy, 1997). With a true SGD method such divergence would not be possible.
The appeal of SGD is so strong that great e↵ort has gone into ﬁnding a practical
way of harnessing it for reinforcement learning. The starting place of all such e↵orts is
the choice of an error or objective function to optimize. In this and the next section
we explore the origins and limits of the most popular proposed objective function, that
based on the Bellman error introduced in the previous section. Although this has been a
popular and inﬂuential approach, the conclusion that we reach here is that it is a misstep
and yields no good learning algorithms. On the other hand, this approach fails in an
interesting way that o↵ers insight into what might constitute a good approach.
To begin, let us consider not the Bellman error, but something more immediate
and naive. Temporal di↵erence learning is driven by the TD error. Why not take the
minimization of the expected square of the TD error as the objective? In the general
function-approximation case, the one-step TD error with discounting is
δt = Rt+1 + γˆv(St+1,wt) −ˆv(St,wt).
A possible objective function then is what one might call the mean square TD error:
TDE(w) =
X
s2S
µ(s)E
⇥
δ2
t
44 St =s, At ⇠⇡
⇤
=
X
s2S
µ(s)E
⇥
⇢tδ2
t
44 St =s, At ⇠b
⇤
= Eb
⇥
⇢tδ2
t
⇤
.
(if µ is the distribution encountered under b)
The last equation is of the form needed for SGD; it gives the objective as an expectation
that can be sampled from experience (remember the experience is due to the behavior
policy b). Thus, following the standard SGD approach, one can derive the per-step update
based on a sample of this expected value:
wt+1 = wt −1
2↵r(⇢tδ2
t )
= wt −↵⇢tδtrδt
= wt + ↵⇢tδt
#
rˆv(St,wt) −γrˆv(St+1,wt)
$
,
(11.23)
which you will recognize as the same as the semi-gradient TD algorithm (11.2) except for
the additional ﬁnal term. This term completes the gradient and makes this a true SGD
algorithm with excellent convergence guarantees. Let us call this algorithm the naive


--- Page 293 ---

11.5. Gradient Descent in the Bellman Error
271
residual-gradient algorithm (after Baird, 1995). Although the naive residual-gradient
algorithm converges robustly, it does not necessarily converge to a desirable place.
Example 11.2: A-split example,
showing the naivet´e of the naive residual-gradient algorithm
A
B
C
0
0
0
1
Consider the three-state episodic MRP shown to the right.
Episodes begin in state A and then ‘split’ stochastically, half
the time going to B (and then invariably going on to terminate
with a reward of 1) and half the time going to state C (and
then invariably terminating with a reward of zero). Reward for
the ﬁrst transition, out of A, is always zero whichever way the
episode goes. As this is an episodic problem, we can take γ to
be 1. We also assume on-policy training, so that ⇢t is always
1, and tabular function approximation, so that the learning algorithms are free to
give arbitrary, independent values to all three states. Thus, this should be an easy
problem.
What should the values be? From A, half the time the return is 1, and half the
time the return is 0; A should have value 1
2. From B the return is always 1, so its
value should be 1, and similarly from C the return is always 0, so its value should
be 0. These are the true values and, as this is a tabular problem, all the methods
presented previously converge to them exactly.
However, the naive residual-gradient algorithm ﬁnds di↵erent values for B and
C. It converges with B having a value of 3
4 and C having a value of 1
4 (A converges
correctly to 1
2). These are in fact the values that minimize the TDE.
Let us compute the TDE for these values. The ﬁrst transition of each episode is
either up from A’s 1
2 to B’s 3
4, a change of 1
4, or down from A’s 1
2 to C’s 1
4, a change
of −1
4. Because the reward is zero on these transitions, and γ = 1, these changes are
the TD errors, and thus the squared TD error is always
1
16 on the ﬁrst transition.
The second transition is similar; it is either up from B’s 3
4 to a reward of 1 (and a
terminal state of value 0), or down from C’s 1
4 to a reward of 0 (again with a terminal
state of value 0). Thus, the TD error is always ± 1
4, for a squared error of
1
16 on the
second step. Thus, for this set of values, the TDE on both steps is
1
16.
Now let’s compute the TDE for the true values (B at 1, C at 0, and A at 1
2). In this
case the ﬁrst transition is either from 1
2 up to 1, at B, or from 1
2 down to 0, at C; in
either case the absolute error is 1
2 and the squared error is 1
4. The second transition
has zero error because the starting value, either 1 or 0 depending on whether the
transition is from B or C, always exactly matches the immediate reward and return.
Thus the squared TD error is 1
4 on the ﬁrst transition and 0 on the second, for a
mean reward over the two transitions of 1
8. As 1
8 is bigger that
1
16, this solution is
worse according to the TDE. On this simple problem, the true values do not have
the smallest TDE.


--- Page 294 ---

272
Chapter 11: O↵-policy Methods with Approximation
A tabular representation is used in the A-split example, so the true state values can
be exactly represented, yet the naive residual-gradient algorithm ﬁnds di↵erent values,
and these values have lower TDE than do the true values. Minimizing the TDE is naive;
by penalizing all TD errors it achieves something more like temporal smoothing than
accurate prediction.
A better idea would seem to be minimizing the mean square Bellman error (BE). If
the exact values are learned, the Bellman error is zero everywhere. Thus, a Bellman-
error-minimizing algorithm should have no trouble with the A-split example. We cannot
expect to achieve zero Bellman error in general, as it would involve ﬁnding the true value
function, which we presume is outside the space of representable value functions. But
getting close to this ideal is a natural-seeming goal. As we have seen, the Bellman error
is also closely related to the TD error. The Bellman error for a state is the expected TD
error in that state. So let’s repeat the derivation above with the expected TD error (all
expectations here are implicitly conditional on St):
wt+1 = wt −1
2↵r(E⇡[δt]2)
= wt −1
2↵r(Eb[⇢tδt]2)
= wt −↵Eb[⇢tδt] rEb[⇢tδt]
= wt −↵Eb
⇥
⇢t(Rt+1 + γˆv(St+1,w) −ˆv(St,w))
⇤
Eb[⇢trδt]
= wt + ↵
h
Eb
⇥
⇢t(Rt+1 + γˆv(St+1,w))
⇤
−ˆv(St,w)
ih
rˆv(St,w) −γEb
⇥
⇢trˆv(St+1,w)
⇤i
.
This update and various ways of sampling it are referred to as the residual-gradient
algorithm. If you simply used the sample values in all the expectations, then the equation
above reduces almost exactly to (11.23), the naive residual-gradient algorithm.1 But
this is naive, because the equation above involves the next state, St+1, appearing in two
expectations that are multiplied together. To get an unbiased sample of the product,
two independent samples of the next state are required, but during normal interaction
with an external environment only one is obtained. One expectation or the other can be
sampled, but not both.
There are two ways to make the residual-gradient algorithm work. One is in the case
of deterministic environments. If the transition to the next state is deterministic, then
the two samples will necessarily be the same, and the naive algorithm is valid. The
other way is to obtain two independent samples of the next state, St+1, from St, one for
the ﬁrst expectation and another for the second expectation. In real interaction with
an environment, this would not seem possible, but when interacting with a simulated
environment, it is. One simply rolls back to the previous state and obtains an alternate
next state before proceeding forward from the ﬁrst next state. In either of these cases the
residual-gradient algorithm is guaranteed to converge to a minimum of the BE under the
usual conditions on the step-size parameter. As a true SGD method, this convergence is
1For state values there remains a small di↵erence in the treatment of the importance sampling ratio
⇢t. In the analagous action-value case (which is the most important case for control algorithms), the
residual-gradient algorithm would reduce exactly to the naive version.


--- Page 295 ---

11.5. Gradient Descent in the Bellman Error
273
robust, applying to both linear and nonlinear function approximators. In the linear case,
convergence is always to the unique w that minimizes the BE.
However, there remain at least three ways in which the convergence of the residual-
gradient method is unsatisfactory. The ﬁrst of these is that empirically it is slow, much
slower that semi-gradient methods. Indeed, proponents of this method have proposed
increasing its speed by combining it with faster semi-gradient methods initially, then
gradually switching over to residual gradient for the convergence guarantee (Baird and
Moore, 1999). The second way in which the residual-gradient algorithm is unsatisfactory
is that it still seems to converge to the wrong values. It does get the right values in all
tabular cases, such as the A-split example, as for those an exact solution to the Bellman
Example 11.3: A-presplit example, a counterexample for the BE
A1
B
C
0
0
0
1
A2
A
Consider the three-state episodic MRP shown to the
right: Episodes start in either A1 or A2, with equal
probability. These two states look exactly the same to
the function approximator, like a single state A whose
feature representation is distinct from and unrelated to
the feature representation of the other two states, B and
C, which are also distinct from each other. Speciﬁcally,
the parameter of the function approximator has three
components, one giving the value of state B, one giving the value of state C, and one
giving the value of both states A1 and A2. Other than the selection of the initial
state, the system is deterministic. If it starts in A1, then it transitions to B with a
reward of 0 and then on to termination with a reward of 1. If it starts in A2, then it
transitions to C, and then to termination, with both rewards zero.
To a learning algorithm, seeing only the features, the system looks identical to
the A-split example. The system seems to always start in A, followed by either
B or C with equal probability, and then terminating with a 1 or a 0 depending
deterministically on the previous state. As in the A-split example, the true values
of B and C are 1 and 0, and the best shared value of A1 and A2 is 1
2, by symmetry.
Because this problem appears externally identical to the A-split example, we
already know what values will be found by the algorithms. Semi-gradient TD
converges to the ideal values just mentioned, while the naive residual-gradient
algorithm converges to values of
3
4 and
1
4 for B and C respectively.
All state
transitions are deterministic, so the non-naive residual-gradient algorithm will also
converge to these values (it is the same algorithm in this case). It follows then that
this ‘naive’ solution must also be the one that minimizes the BE, and so it is. On a
deterministic problem, the Bellman errors and TD errors are all the same, so the
BE is always the same as the TDE. Optimizing the BE on this example gives rise to
the same failure mode as with the naive residual-gradient algorithm on the A-split
example.


--- Page 296 ---

274
Chapter 11: O↵-policy Methods with Approximation
equation is possible. But if we examine examples with genuine function approximation,
then the residual-gradient algorithm, and indeed the BE objective, seem to ﬁnd the
wrong value functions. One of the most telling such examples is the variation on the
A-split example known as the A-presplit example, shown on the preceding page, in which
the residual-gradient algorithm ﬁnds the same poor solution as its naive version. This
example shows intuitively that minimizing the BE (which the residual-gradient algorithm
surely does) may not be a desirable goal.
The third way in which the convergence of the residual-gradient algorithm is not
satisfactory is explained in the next section. Like the second way, the third way is also
a problem with the BE objective itself rather than with any particular algorithm for
achieving it.
11.6
The Bellman Error is Not Learnable
The concept of learnability that we introduce in this section is di↵erent from that
commonly used in machine learning. There, a hypothesis is said to be “learnable” if
it is eﬃciently learnable, meaning that it can be learned within a polynomial rather
than an exponential number of examples. Here we use the term in a more basic way,
to mean learnable at all, with any amount of experience. It turns out many quantities
of apparent interest in reinforcement learning cannot be learned even from an inﬁnite
amount of experiential data. These quantities are well deﬁned and can be computed
given knowledge of the internal structure of the environment, but cannot be computed
or estimated from the observed sequence of feature vectors, actions, and rewards.2 We
say that they are not learnable. It will turn out that the Bellman error objective (BE)
introduced in the last two sections is not learnable in this sense. That the Bellman error
objective cannot be learned from the observable data is probably the strongest reason
not to seek it.
To make the concept of learnability clear, let’s start with some simple examples.
Consider the two Markov reward processes3 (MRPs) diagrammed below:
0
2
0
2
2
0
w
w
w
Where two edges leave a state, both transitions are assumed to occur with equal probability,
and the numbers indicate the reward received. All the states appear the same; they all
produce the same single-component feature vector x = 1 and have approximated value
w. Thus, the only varying part of the data trajectory is the reward sequence. The left
MRP stays in the same state and emits an endless stream of 0s and 2s at random, each
with 0.5 probability. The right MRP, on every step, either stays in its current state or
2They would of course be estimated if the state sequence were observed rather than only the
corresponding feature vectors.
3All MRPs can be considered MDPs with a single action in all states; what we conclude about MRPs
here applies as well to MDPs.


--- Page 297 ---

11.6. The Bellman Error is Not Learnable
275
switches to the other, with equal probability. The reward is deterministic in this MRP,
always a 0 from one state and always a 2 from the other, but because the each state
is equally likely on each step, the observable data is again an endless stream of 0s and
2s at random, identical to that produced by the left MRP. (We can assume the right
MRP starts in one of two states at random with equal probability.) Thus, even given
an inﬁnite amount of data, it would not be possible to tell which of these two MRPs
was generating it. In particular, we could not tell if the MRP has one state or two, is
stochastic or deterministic. These things are not learnable.
This pair of MRPs also illustrates that the VE objective (9.1) is not learnable. If
γ = 0, then the true values of the three states (in both MRPs), left to right, are 1, 0,
and 2. Suppose w = 1. Then the VE is 0 for the left MRP and 1 for the right MRP.
Because the VE is di↵erent in the two problems, yet the data generated has the same
distribution, the VE cannot be learned. The VE is not a unique function of the data
distribution. And if it cannot be learned, then how could the VE possibly be useful as
an objective for learning?
If an objective cannot be learned, it does indeed draw its utility into question. In
the case of the VE, however, there is a way out. Note that the same solution, w = 1,
is optimal for both MRPs above (assuming µ is the same for the two indistinguishable
states in the right MRP). Is this a coincidence, or could it be generally true that all
MDPs with the same data distribution also have the same optimal parameter vector? If
this is true—and we will show next that it is—then the VE remains a usable objective.
The VE is not learnable, but the parameter that optimizes it is!
To understand this, it is useful to bring in another natural objective function, this
time one that is clearly learnable. One error that is always observable is that between the
value estimate at each time and the return from that time. The mean square return error,
denoted RE, is the expectation, under µ, of the square of this error. In the on-policy case
the RE can be written
RE(w) = E
h#
Gt −ˆv(St,w)
$2i
= VE(w) + E
h#
Gt −v⇡(St)
$2i
.
(11.24)
Thus, the two objectives are the same except for a variance term that does not depend on
the parameter vector. The two objectives must therefore have the same optimal parameter
value w⇤. The overall relationships are summarized in the left side of Figure 11.4.
⇤Exercise 11.4 Prove (11.24). Hint: Write the RE as an expectation over possible states
s of the expectation of the squared error given that St = s. Then add and subtract the
true value of state s from the error (before squaring), grouping the subtracted true value
with the return and the added true value with the estimated value. Then, if you expand
the square, the most complex term will end up being zero, leaving you with (11.24). ⇤
Now let us return to the BE. The BE is like the VE in that it can be computed from
knowledge of the MDP but is not learnable from data. But it is not like the VE in that its
minimum solution is not learnable. The box on the next page presents a counterexample—
two MRPs that generate the same data distribution but whose minimizing parameter
vector is di↵erent, proving that the optimal parameter vector is not a function of the


--- Page 298 ---

276
Chapter 11: O↵-policy Methods with Approximation
Example 11.4: Counterexample to the learnability of the Bellman error
To show the full range of possibilities we need a slightly more complex pair of Markov
reward processes (MRPs) than those considered earlier. Consider the following two
MRPs:
B
A
1
0
-1
B
A
0
-1 B
0
1
-1
Where two edges leave a state, both transitions are assumed to occur with equal
probability, and the numbers indicate the reward received. The MRP on the left has
two states that are represented distinctly. The MRP on the right has three states,
two of which, B and B0, appear the same and must be given the same approximate
value. Speciﬁcally, w has two components and the value of state A is given by the ﬁrst
component and the value of B and B0 is given by the second. The second MRP has
been designed so that equal time is spent in all three states, so we can take µ(s) = 1
3,
for all s.
Note that the observable data distribution is identical for the two MRPs. In both
cases the agent will see single occurrences of A followed by a 0, then some number
of apparent Bs, each followed by a −1 except the last, which is followed by a 1, then
we start all over again with a single A and a 0, etc. All the statistical details are the
same as well; in both MRPs, the probability of a string of k Bs is 2−k.
Now suppose w = 0. In the ﬁrst MRP, this is an exact solution, and the BE is
zero. In the second MRP, this solution produces a squared error in both B and B0 of
1, such that BE = µ(B)1 + µ(B0)1 = 2
3. These two MRPs, which generate the same
data distribution, have di↵erent BEs; the BE is not learnable.
Moreover (and unlike the earlier example for the VE) the minimizing value of w
is di↵erent for the two MRPs. For the ﬁrst MRP, w = 0 minimizes the BE for any
γ. For the second MRP, the minimizing w is a complicated function of γ, but in
the limit, as γ ! 1, it is (−1
2, 0)>. Thus the solution that minimizes BE cannot be
estimated from data alone; knowledge of the MRP beyond what is revealed in the
data is required. In this sense, it is impossible in principle to pursue the BE as an
objective for learning.
It may be surprising that in the second MRP the BE-minimizing value of A is so far
from zero. Recall that A has a dedicated weight and thus its value is unconstrained
by function approximation. A is followed by a reward of 0 and transition to a state
with a value of nearly 0, which suggests vw(A) should be 0; why is its optimal
value substantially negative rather than 0? The answer is that making vw(A) negative
reduces the error upon arriving in A from B. The reward on this deterministic transition
is 1, which implies that B should have a value 1 more than A. Because B’s value is
approximately zero, A’s value is driven toward −1. The BE-minimizing value of ⇡−1
2
for A is a compromise between reducing the errors on leaving and on entering A.


--- Page 299 ---

11.6. The Bellman Error is Not Learnable
277
MDP1
MDP2
MSBE1
MSBE2
✓∗
1
✓∗
2
MSPBE
✓∗
3
MSTDE
✓∗
4
Data
distribution
MDP1
MDP2
MSVE1
MSVE2
MSRE
Data
distribution
✓∗
w⇤
w⇤
1
w⇤
2
w⇤
3
w⇤
4
VE1
VE2
RE
BE2
BE1
PBE
TDE
Monte Carlo
objectives
Bootstrapping
objectives
Figure 11.4: Causal relationships among the data distribution, MDPs, and various objectives.
Left, Monte Carlo objectives: Two di↵erent MDPs can produce the same data distribution
yet also produce di↵erent VEs, proving that the VE objective cannot be determined from data
and is not learnable. However, all such VEs must have the same optimal parameter vector, w⇤!
Moreover, this same w⇤can be determined from another objective, the RE, which is uniquely
determined from the data distribution. Thus w⇤and the RE are learnable even though the VEs
are not. Right, Bootstrapping objectives: Two di↵erent MDPs can produce the same data
distribution yet also produce di↵erent BEs and have di↵erent minimizing parameter vectors;
these are not learnable from the data distribution. The PBE and TDE objectives and their
(di↵erent) minima can be directly determined from data and thus are learnable.
data and thus cannot be learned from it. The other bootstrapping objectives that we
have considered, the PBE and TDE, can be determined from data (are learnable) and
determine optimal solutions that are in general di↵erent from each other and the BE
minimums. The general case is summarized in the right side of Figure 11.4.
Thus, the BE is not learnable; it cannot be estimated from feature vectors and other
observable data. This limits the BE to model-based settings. There can be no algorithm
that minimizes the BE without access to the underlying MDP states beyond the feature
vectors. The residual-gradient algorithm is only able to minimize BE because it is allowed
to double sample from the same state—not a state that has the same feature vector,
but one that is guaranteed to be the same underlying state. We can see now that there
is no way around this. Minimizing the BE requires some such access to the nominal,
underlying MDP. This is an important limitation of the BE beyond that identiﬁed in the
A-presplit example on page 273. All this directs more attention toward the PBE.


--- Page 300 ---

278
Chapter 11: O↵-policy Methods with Approximation
11.7
Gradient-TD Methods
We now consider SGD methods for minimizing the PBE. As true SGD methods, these
Gradient-TD methods have robust convergence properties even under o↵-policy training
and nonlinear function approximation. Remember that in the linear case there is always
an exact solution, the TD ﬁxed point wTD, at which the PBE is zero. This solution could
be found by least-squares methods (Section 9.8), but only by methods of quadratic O(d2)
complexity in the number of parameters. We seek instead an SGD method, which should
be O(d) and have robust convergence properties. Gradient-TD methods come close to
achieving these goals, at the cost of a rough doubling of computational complexity.
To derive an SGD method for the PBE (assuming linear function approximation) we
begin by expanding and rewriting the objective (11.22) in matrix terms:
PBE(w) =
&&⇧¯δw
&&2
µ
= (⇧¯δw)>D⇧¯δw
(from (11.14))
= ¯δ>
w⇧>D⇧¯δw
= ¯δ>
wDX
#
X>DX
$−1X>D¯δw
(11.25)
(using (11.13) and the identity ⇧>D⇧= DX
#
X>DX
$−1 X>D)
=
#
X>D¯δw
$>#
X>DX
$−1#
X>D¯δw
$
.
(11.26)
The gradient with respect to w is
rPBE(w) = 2r
⇥
X>D¯δw
⇤> #
X>DX
$−1#
X>D¯δw
$
.
To turn this into an SGD method, we have to sample something on every time step that
has this quantity as its expected value. Let us take µ to be the distribution of states
visited under the behavior policy. All three of the factors above can then be written in
terms of expectations under this distribution. For example, the last factor can be written
X>D¯δw =
X
s
µ(s)x(s)¯δw(s) = E[⇢tδtxt] ,
which is just the expectation of the semi-gradient TD(0) update (11.2). The ﬁrst factor
is the transpose of the gradient of this update:
rE[⇢tδtxt]> = E
⇥
⇢trδ>
t x>
t
⇤
= E
⇥
⇢tr(Rt+1 + γw>xt+1 −w>xt)>x>
t
⇤
(using episodic δt)
= E
⇥
⇢t(γxt+1 −xt)x>
t
⇤
.
Finally, the middle factor is the inverse of the expected outer-product matrix of the
feature vectors:
X>DX =
X
s
µ(s)x(s)x(s)> = E
⇥
xtx>
t
⇤
.


--- Page 301 ---

11.7. Gradient-TD Methods
279
Substituting these expectations for the three factors in our expression for the gradient of
the PBE, we get
rPBE(w) = 2E
⇥
⇢t(γxt+1 −xt)x>
t
⇤
E
⇥
xtx>
t
⇤−1 E[⇢tδtxt] .
(11.27)
It might not be obvious that we have made any progress by writing the gradient in this
form. It is a product of three expressions and the ﬁrst and last are not independent.
They both depend on the next feature vector xt+1; we cannot simply sample both of
these expectations and then multiply the samples. This would give us a biased estimate
of the gradient just as in the residual-gradient algorithm.
Another idea would be to estimate the three expectations separately and then combine
them to produce an unbiased estimate of the gradient. This would work, but would
require a lot of computational resources, particularly to store the ﬁrst two expectations,
which are d ⇥d matrices, and to compute the inverse of the second. This idea can be
improved. If two of the three expectations are estimated and stored, then the third could
be sampled and used in conjunction with the two stored quantities. For example, you
could store estimates of the second two quantities (using the increment inverse-updating
techniques in Section 9.8) and then sample the ﬁrst expression. Unfortunately, the overall
algorithm would still be of quadratic complexity (of order O(d2)).
The idea of storing some estimates separately and then combining them with samples
is a good one and is also used in Gradient-TD methods. Gradient-TD methods estimate
and store the product of the second two factors in (11.27). These factors are a d ⇥d
matrix and a d-vector, so their product is just a d-vector, like w itself. We denote this
second learned vector as v:
v ⇡E
⇥
xtx>
t
⇤−1 E[⇢tδtxt] .
(11.28)
This form is familiar to students of linear supervised learning. It is the solution to a linear
least-squares problem that tries to approximate ⇢tδt from the features. The standard
SGD method for incrementally ﬁnding the vector v that minimizes the expected squared
error
#
v>xt −⇢tδt
$2 is known as the Least Mean Square (LMS) rule (here augmented
with an importance sampling ratio):
vt+1 .= vt + β⇢t
#
δt −v>
t xt
$
xt,
where β > 0 is another step-size parameter. We can use this method to e↵ectively achieve
(11.28) with O(d) storage and per-step computation.
Given a stored estimate vt approximating (11.28), we can update our main parameter
vector wt using SGD methods based on (11.27). The simplest such rule is
wt+1 = wt −1
2↵rPBE(wt)
(the general SGD rule)
= wt −1
2↵2E
⇥
⇢t(γxt+1 −xt)x>
t
⇤
E
⇥
xtx>
t
⇤−1 E[⇢tδtxt]
(from (11.27))
= wt + ↵E
⇥
⇢t(xt −γxt+1)x>
t
⇤
E
⇥
xtx>
t
⇤−1 E[⇢tδtxt]
(11.29)
⇡wt + ↵E
⇥
⇢t(xt −γxt+1)x>
t
⇤
vt
(based on (11.28))
⇡wt + ↵⇢t (xt −γxt+1) x>
t vt.
(sampling)


--- Page 302 ---

280
Chapter 11: O↵-policy Methods with Approximation
This algorithm is called GTD2. Note that if the ﬁnal inner product (x>
t vt) is done ﬁrst,
then the entire algorithm is of O(d) complexity.
A slightly better algorithm can be derived by doing a few more analytic steps before
substituting in vt. Continuing from (11.29):
wt+1 = wt + ↵E
⇥
⇢t(xt −γxt+1)x>
t
⇤
E
⇥
xtx>
t
⇤−1 E[⇢tδtxt]
= wt + ↵
#
E
⇥
⇢txtx>
t
⇤
−γE
⇥
⇢txt+1x>
t
⇤$
E
⇥
xtx>
t
⇤−1 E[⇢tδtxt]
= wt + ↵
#
E
⇥
xtx>
t
⇤
−γE
⇥
⇢txt+1x>
t
⇤$
E
⇥
xtx>
t
⇤−1 E[⇢tδtxt]
= wt + ↵
⇣
E[⇢tδtxt] −γE
⇥
⇢txt+1x>
t
⇤
E
⇥
xtx>
t
⇤−1 E[⇢tδtxt]
⌘
⇡wt + ↵
#
E[⇢tδtxt] −γE
⇥
⇢txt+1x>
t
⇤
vt
$
(based on (11.28))
⇡wt + ↵⇢t
#
δtxt −γxt+1x>
t vt
$
,
(sampling)
which again is O(d) if the ﬁnal product (x>
t vt) is done ﬁrst. This algorithm is known as
either TD(0) with gradient correction (TDC) or, alternatively, as GTD(0).
Figure 11.5 shows a sample and the expected behavior of TDC on Baird’s counterex-
ample. As intended, the PBE falls to zero, but note that the individual components
of the parameter vector do not approach zero. In fact, these values are still far from
w1– w6
w8
w8
p
VE
p
VE
p
PBE
p
PBE
10
5
2
0
-2.34
0
1000
0
1000
Steps
w7
w1– w6
TDC
Expected TDC
Sweeps
w7
Figure 11.5: The behavior of the TDC algorithm on Baird’s counterexample. On the left is
shown a typical single run, and on the right is shown the expected behavior of this algorithm if
the updates are done synchronously (analogous to (11.9), except for the two TDC parameter
vectors). The step sizes were ↵= 0.005 and β = 0.05.


--- Page 303 ---

11.8. Emphatic-TD Methods
281
an optimal solution, ˆv(s) = 0, for all s, for which w would have to be proportional to
(1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 4, −2)>. After 1000 iterations we are still far from an optimal solution, as
we can see from the VE, which remains almost 2. The system is actually converging to
an optimal solution, but progress is extremely slow because the PBE is already so close
to zero.
GTD2 and TDC both involve two learning processes, a primary one for w and a
secondary one for v. The logic of the primary learning process relies on the secondary
learning process having ﬁnished, at least approximately, whereas the secondary learning
process proceeds without being inﬂuenced by the ﬁrst. We call this sort of asymmetrical
dependence a cascade. In cascades we often assume that the secondary learning process
is proceeding faster and thus is always at its asymptotic value, ready and accurate to
assist the primary learning process. The convergence proofs for these methods often make
this assumption explicitly. These are called two-time-scale proofs. The fast time scale is
that of the secondary learning process, and the slower time scale is that of the primary
learning process. If ↵is the step size of the primary learning process, and β is the step
size of the secondary learning process, then these convergence proofs will typically require
that in the limit β ! 0 and ↵
β ! 0.
Gradient-TD methods are currently the most well understood and widely used stable
o↵-policy methods. There are extensions to action values and control (GQ, Maei et al.,
2010), to eligibility traces (GTD(λ) and GQ(λ), Maei, 2011; Maei and Sutton, 2010), and
to nonlinear function approximation (Maei et al., 2009). There have also been proposed
hybrid algorithms midway between semi-gradient TD and gradient TD (Hackman, 2012;
White and White, 2016). Hybrid-TD algorithms behave like Gradient-TD algorithms in
states where the target and behavior policies are very di↵erent, and behave like semi-
gradient algorithms in states where the target and behavior policies are the same. Finally,
the Gradient-TD idea has been combined with the ideas of proximal methods and control
variates to produce more eﬃcient methods (Mahadevan et al., 2014; Du et al., 2017).
11.8
Emphatic-TD Methods
We turn now to the second major strategy that has been extensively explored for obtaining
a cheap and eﬃcient o↵-policy learning method with function approximation. Recall
that linear semi-gradient TD methods are eﬃcient and stable when trained under the
on-policy distribution, and that we showed in Section 9.4 that this has to do with the
positive deﬁniteness of the matrix A (9.11)4 and the match between the on-policy state
distribution µ⇡and the state-transition probabilities p(s|s, a) under the target policy. In
o↵-policy learning, we reweight the state transitions using importance sampling so that
they become appropriate for learning about the target policy, but the state distribution
is still that of the behavior policy. There is a mismatch. A natural idea is to somehow
reweight the states, emphasizing some and de-emphasizing others, so as to return the
distribution of updates to the on-policy distribution. There would then be a match,
and stability and convergence would follow from existing results. This is the idea of
4In the o↵-policy case, the matrix A is generally deﬁned as Es⇠b
⇥
x(s)E
⇥
x(St+1)>"" St =s, At ⇠⇡
⇤⇤
.


--- Page 304 ---

282
Chapter 11: O↵-policy Methods with Approximation
Emphatic-TD methods, ﬁrst introduced for on-policy training in Section 9.11.
Actually, the notion of “the on-policy distribution” is not quite right, as there are many
on-policy distributions, and any one of these is suﬃcient to guarantee stability. Consider
an undiscounted episodic problem. The way episodes terminate is fully determined by the
transition probabilities, but there may be several di↵erent ways the episodes might begin.
However the episodes start, if all state transitions are due to the target policy, then the
state distribution that results is an on-policy distribution. You might start close to the
terminal state and visit only a few states with high probability before ending the episode.
Or you might start far away and pass through many states before terminating. Both are
on-policy distributions, and training on both with a linear semi-gradient method would
be guaranteed to be stable. However the process starts, an on-policy distribution results
as long as all states encountered are updated up until termination.
If there is discounting, it can be treated as partial or probabilistic termination for these
purposes. If γ = 0.9, then we can consider that with probability 0.1 the process terminates
on every time step and then immediately restarts in the state that is transitioned to. A
discounted problem is one that is continually terminating and restarting with probability
1 −γ on every step. This way of thinking about discounting is an example of a more
general notion of pseudo termination—termination that does not a↵ect the sequence of
state transitions, but does a↵ect the learning process and the quantities being learned.
This kind of pseudo termination is important to o↵-policy learning because the restarting
is optional—remember we can start any way we want to—and the termination relieves
the need to keep including encountered states within the on-policy distribution. That is,
if we don’t consider the new states as restarts, then discounting quickly gives us a limited
on-policy distribution.
The one-step Emphatic-TD algorithm for learning episodic state values is deﬁned by:
δt = Rt+1 + γˆv(St+1,wt) −ˆv(St,wt),
wt+1 = wt + ↵Mt⇢tδtrˆv(St,wt),
Mt = γ⇢t−1Mt−1 + It,
with It, the interest, being arbitrary and Mt, the emphasis, being initialized to M−1 = 0.
How does this algorithm perform on Baird’s counterexample? Figure 11.6 shows the
trajectory in expectation of the components of the parameter vector (for the case in
which It =1, for all t). There are some oscillations but eventually everything converges
and the VE goes to zero. These trajectories are obtained by iteratively computing the
expectation of the parameter vector trajectory without any of the variance due to sampling
of transitions and rewards. We do not show the results of applying the Emphatic-TD
algorithm directly because its variance on Baird’s counterexample is so high that it is
nigh impossible to get consistent results in computational experiments. The algorithm
converges to the optimal solution in theory on this problem, but in practice it does
not. We turn to the topic of reducing the variance of all these algorithms in the next
section.


--- Page 305 ---

11.9. Reducing Variance
283
Sweeps
w1– w6
w7
w8
p
VE
10
5
2
0
-5
0
1000
Figure 11.6: The behavior of the one-step Emphatic-TD algorithm in expectation on Baird’s
counterexample. The step size was ↵= 0.03.
11.9
Reducing Variance
O↵-policy learning is inherently of greater variance than on-policy learning. This is not
surprising; if you receive data less closely related to a policy, you should expect to learn
less about the policy’s values. In the extreme, one may be able to learn nothing. You
can’t expect to learn how to drive by cooking dinner, for example. Only if the target and
behavior policies are related, if they visit similar states and take similar actions, should
one be able to make signiﬁcant progress in o↵-policy training.
On the other hand, any policy has many neighbors, many similar policies with con-
siderable overlap in states visited and actions chosen, and yet which are not identical.
The raison d’ˆetre of o↵-policy learning is to enable generalization to this vast number
of related-but-not-identical policies. The problem remains of how to make the best use
of the experience. Now that we have some methods that are stable in expected value
(if the step sizes are set right), attention naturally turns to reducing the variance of the
estimates. There are many possible ideas, and we can just touch on a few of them in this
introductory text.
Why is controlling variance especially critical in o↵-policy methods based on importance
sampling? As we have seen, importance sampling often involves products of policy ratios.
The ratios are always one in expectation (5.13), but their actual values may be very high
or as low as zero. Successive ratios are uncorrelated, so their products are also always one
in expected value, but they can be of very high variance. Recall that these ratios multiply
the step size in SGD methods, so high variance means taking steps that vary greatly in
their sizes. This is problematic for SGD because of the occasional very large steps. They
must not be so large as to take the parameter to a part of the space with a very di↵erent
gradient. SGD methods rely on averaging over multiple steps to get a good sense of
the gradient, and if they make large moves from single samples they become unreliable.
If the step-size parameter is set small enough to prevent this, then the expected step


--- Page 306 ---

284
Chapter 11: O↵-policy Methods with Approximation
can end up being very small, resulting in very slow learning. The notions of momentum
(Derthick, 1984), of Polyak-Ruppert averaging (Polyak, 1990; Ruppert, 1988; Polyak and
Juditsky, 1992), or further extensions of these ideas may signiﬁcantly help. Methods for
adaptively setting separate step sizes for di↵erent components of the parameter vector
are also pertinent (e.g., Jacobs, 1988; Sutton, 1992b, c), as are the “importance weight
aware” updates of Karampatziakis and Langford (2010).
In Chapter 5 we saw how weighted importance sampling is signiﬁcantly better behaved,
with lower variance updates, than ordinary importance sampling. However, adapting
weighted importance sampling to function approximation is challenging and can probably
only be done approximately with O(d) complexity (Mahmood and Sutton, 2015).
The Tree Backup algorithm (Section 7.5) shows that it is possible to perform some
o↵-policy learning without using importance sampling. This idea has been extended to
the o↵-policy case to produce stable and more eﬃcient methods by Munos, Stepleton,
Harutyunyan, and Bellemare (2016) and by Mahmood, Yu and Sutton (2017).
Another, complementary strategy is to allow the target policy to be determined in
part by the behavior policy, in such a way that it never can be so di↵erent from it to
create large importance sampling ratios. For example, the target policy can be deﬁned by
reference to the behavior policy, as in the “recognizers” proposed by Precup et al. (2006).
11.10
Summary
O↵-policy learning is a tempting challenge, testing our ingenuity in designing stable and
eﬃcient learning algorithms. Tabular Q-learning makes o↵-policy learning seem easy,
and it has natural generalizations to Expected Sarsa and to the Tree Backup algorithm.
But as we have seen in this chapter, the extension of these ideas to signiﬁcant function
approximation, even linear function approximation, involves new challenges and forces us
to deepen our understanding of reinforcement learning algorithms.
Why go to such lengths? One reason to seek o↵-policy algorithms is to give ﬂexibility
in dealing with the tradeo↵between exploration and exploitation. Another is to free
behavior from learning, and avoid the tyranny of the target policy. TD learning appears
to hold out the possibility of learning about multiple things in parallel, of using one
stream of experience to solve many tasks simultaneously. We can certainly do this in
special cases, just not in every case that we would like to or as eﬃciently as we would
like to.
In this chapter we divided the challenge of o↵-policy learning into two parts. The
ﬁrst part, correcting the targets of learning for the behavior policy, is straightforwardly
dealt with using the techniques devised earlier for the tabular case, albeit at the cost of
increasing the variance of the updates and thereby slowing learning. High variance will
probably always remains a challenge for o↵-policy learning.
The second part of the challenge of o↵-policy learning emerges as the instability
of semi-gradient TD methods that involve bootstrapping. We seek powerful function
approximation, o↵-policy learning, and the eﬃciency and ﬂexibility of bootstrapping


--- Page 307 ---

11.10.
Summary
285
TD methods, but it is challenging to combine all three aspects of this deadly triad in
one algorithm without introducing the potential for instability. There have been several
attempts. The most popular has been to seek to perform true stochastic gradient descent
(SGD) in the Bellman error (a.k.a. the Bellman residual). However, our analysis concludes
that this is not an appealing goal in many cases, and that anyway it is impossible to
achieve with a learning algorithm—the gradient of the BE is not learnable from experience
that reveals only feature vectors and not underlying states. Another approach, Gradient-
TD methods, performs SGD in the projected Bellman error. The gradient of the PBE
is learnable with O(d) complexity, but at the cost of a second parameter vector with a
second step size. The newest family of methods, Emphatic-TD methods, reﬁne an old idea
for reweighting updates, emphasizing some and de-emphasizing others. In this way they
restore the special properties that make on-policy learning stable with computationally
simple semi-gradient methods.
The whole area of o↵-policy learning is relatively new and unsettled. Which methods
are best or even adequate is not yet clear. Are the complexities of the new methods
introduced at the end of this chapter really necessary? Which of them can be combined
e↵ectively with variance reduction methods? The potential for o↵-policy learning remains
tantalizing, the best way to achieve it still a mystery.
Bibliographical and Historical Remarks
11.1
The ﬁrst semi-gradient method was linear TD(λ) (Sutton, 1988). The name
“semi-gradient” is more recent (Sutton, 2015a). Semi-gradient o↵-policy TD(0)
with general importance-sampling ratio may not have been explicitly stated until
Sutton, Mahmood, and White (2016), but the action-value forms were introduced
by Precup, Sutton, and Singh (2000), who also did eligibility trace forms of these
algorithms (see Chapter 12). Their continuing, undiscounted forms have not
been signiﬁcantly explored. The n-step forms given here are new.
11.2
The earliest w-to-2w example was given by Tsitsiklis and Van Roy (1996), who
also introduced the speciﬁc counterexample in the box on page 263. Baird’s
counterexample is due to Baird (1995), though the version we present here is
slightly modiﬁed. Averaging methods for function approximation were developed
by Gordon (1995, 1996b). Other examples of instability with o↵-policy DP
methods and more complex methods of function approximation are given by
Boyan and Moore (1995). Bradtke (1993) gives an example in which Q-learning
using linear function approximation in a linear quadratic regulation problem
converges to a destabilizing policy.
11.3
The deadly triad was ﬁrst identiﬁed by Sutton (1995b) and thoroughly analyzed
by Tsitsiklis and Van Roy (1997). The name “deadly triad” is due to Sutton
(2015a).
11.4
This kind of linear analysis was pioneered by Tsitsiklis and Van Roy (1996; 1997),
including the dynamic programming operator. Diagrams like Figure 11.3 were


--- Page 308 ---

286
Chapter 11: O↵-policy Methods with Approximation
introduced by Lagoudakis and Parr (2003).
What we have called the Bellman operator, and denoted B⇡, is more commonly
denoted T ⇡and called a “dynamic programming operator,” while a generalized
form, denoted T (λ), is called the “TD(λ) operator” (Tsitsiklis and Van Roy, 1996,
1997).
11.5
The BE was ﬁrst proposed as an objective function for dynamic programming by
Schweitzer and Seidmann (1985). Baird (1995, 1999) extended it to TD learning
based on stochastic gradient descent. In the literature, BE minimization is often
referred to as Bellman residual minimization.
The earliest A-split example is due to Dayan (1992). The two forms given here
were introduced by Sutton et al. (2009a).
11.6
The contents of this section are new to this text.
11.7
Gradient-TD methods were introduced by Sutton, Szepesv´ari, and Maei (2009b).
The methods highlighted in this section were introduced by Sutton et al. (2009a)
and Mahmood et al. (2014).
A major extension to proximal TD methods
was developed by Mahadevan et al.
(2014).
The most sensitive empirical
investigations to date of Gradient-TD and related methods are given by Geist
and Scherrer (2014), Dann, Neumann, and Peters (2014), White (2015), and
Ghiassian, Patterson, White, Sutton, and White (2018). Recent developments in
the theory of Gradient-TD methods are presented by Yu (2017).
11.8
Emphatic-TD methods were introduced by Sutton, Mahmood, and White (2016).
Full convergence proofs and other theory were later established by Yu (2015;
2016; Yu, Mahmood, and Sutton, 2017), Hallak, Tamar, and Mannor (2015), and
Hallak, Tamar, Munos, and Mannor (2016).

