============================================================
 Chapter 8 - Planning and Learning with Tabular Methods
 (PDF pages 181-216)
============================================================

--- Page 181 ---

Chapter 8
Planning and Learning with
Tabular Methods
In this chapter we develop a uniﬁed view of reinforcement learning methods that require
a model of the environment, such as dynamic programming and heuristic search, and
methods that can be used without a model, such as Monte Carlo and temporal-di↵erence
methods. These are respectively called model-based and model-free reinforcement learning
methods. Model-based methods rely on planning as their primary component, while
model-free methods primarily rely on learning. Although there are real di↵erences between
these two kinds of methods, there are also great similarities. In particular, the heart of
both kinds of methods is the computation of value functions. Moreover, all the methods
are based on looking ahead to future events, computing a backed-up value, and then
using it as an update target for an approximate value function. Earlier in this book we
presented Monte Carlo and temporal-di↵erence methods as distinct alternatives, then
showed how they can be uniﬁed by n-step methods. Our goal in this chapter is a similar
integration of model-based and model-free methods. Having established these as distinct
in earlier chapters, we now explore the extent to which they can be intermixed.
8.1
Models and Planning
By a model of the environment we mean anything that an agent can use to predict how the
environment will respond to its actions. Given a state and an action, a model produces a
prediction of the resultant next state and next reward. If the model is stochastic, then
there are several possible next states and next rewards, each with some probability of
occurring. Some models produce a description of all possibilities and their probabilities;
these we call distribution models. Other models produce just one of the possibilities,
sampled according to the probabilities; these we call sample models. For example, consider
modeling the sum of a dozen dice. A distribution model would produce all possible sums
and their probabilities of occurring, whereas a sample model would produce an individual


--- Page 182 ---

160
Chapter 8: Planning and Learning with Tabular Methods
sum drawn according to this probability distribution. The kind of model assumed in
dynamic programming—estimates of the MDP’s dynamics, p(s0, r|s, a)—is a distribution
model. The kind of model used in the blackjack example in Chapter 5 is a sample model.
Distribution models are stronger than sample models in that they can always be used
to produce samples. However, in many applications it is much easier to obtain sample
models than distribution models. The dozen dice are a simple example of this. It would
be easy to write a computer program to simulate the dice rolls and return the sum, but
harder and more error-prone to ﬁgure out all the possible sums and their probabilities.
Models can be used to mimic or simulate experience. Given a starting state and action,
a sample model produces a possible transition, and a distribution model generates all
possible transitions weighted by their probabilities of occurring. Given a starting state
and a policy, a sample model could produce an entire episode, and a distribution model
could generate all possible episodes and their probabilities. In either case, we say the
model is used to simulate the environment and produce simulated experience.
The word planning is used in several di↵erent ways in di↵erent ﬁelds. We use the
term to refer to any computational process that takes a model as input and produces or
improves a policy for interacting with the modeled environment:
planning
model
policy
In artiﬁcial intelligence, there are two distinct approaches to planning according to our
deﬁnition. State-space planning, which includes the approach we take in this book,
is viewed primarily as a search through the state space for an optimal policy or an
optimal path to a goal. Actions cause transitions from state to state, and value functions
are computed over states. In what we call plan-space planning, planning is instead a
search through the space of plans. Operators transform one plan into another, and
value functions, if any, are deﬁned over the space of plans. Plan-space planning includes
evolutionary methods and “partial-order planning,” a common kind of planning in artiﬁcial
intelligence in which the ordering of steps is not completely determined at all stages of
planning. Plan-space methods are diﬃcult to apply eﬃciently to the stochastic sequential
decision problems that are the focus in reinforcement learning, and we do not consider
them further (but see, e.g., Russell and Norvig, 2010).
The uniﬁed view we present in this chapter is that all state-space planning methods
share a common structure, a structure that is also present in the learning methods
presented in this book. It takes the rest of the chapter to develop this view, but there are
two basic ideas: (1) all state-space planning methods involve computing value functions
as a key intermediate step toward improving the policy, and (2) they compute value
functions by updates or backup operations applied to simulated experience. This common
structure can be diagrammed as follows:
values
backups
model
simulated
experience
policy
updates
backups
Dynamic programming methods clearly ﬁt this structure: they make sweeps through the
space of states, generating for each state the distribution of possible transitions. Each
distribution is then used to compute a backed-up value (update target) and update the


--- Page 183 ---

8.2. Dyna: Integrated Planning, Acting, and Learning
161
state’s estimated value. In this chapter we argue that various other state-space planning
methods also ﬁt this structure, with individual methods di↵ering only in the kinds of
updates they do, the order in which they do them, and in how long the backed-up
information is retained.
Viewing planning methods in this way emphasizes their relationship to the learning
methods that we have described in this book. The heart of both learning and planning
methods is the estimation of value functions by backing-up update operations. The
di↵erence is that whereas planning uses simulated experience generated by a model,
learning methods use real experience generated by the environment. Of course this
di↵erence leads to a number of other di↵erences, for example, in how performance is
assessed and in how ﬂexibly experience can be generated. But the common structure
means that many ideas and algorithms can be transferred between planning and learning.
In particular, in many cases a learning algorithm can be substituted for the key update
step of a planning method. Learning methods require only experience as input, and in
many cases they can be applied to simulated experience just as well as to real experience.
The box below shows a simple example of a planning method based on one-step tabular
Q-learning and on random samples from a sample model. This method, which we call
random-sample one-step tabular Q-planning, converges to the optimal policy for the model
under the same conditions that one-step tabular Q-learning converges to the optimal
policy for the real environment (each state–action pair must be selected an inﬁnite number
of times in Step 1, and ↵must decrease appropriately over time).
Random-sample one-step tabular Q-planning
Loop forever:
1. Select a state, S 2 S, and an action, A 2 A(S), at random
2. Send S, A to a sample model, and obtain
a sample next reward, R, and a sample next state, S0
3. Apply one-step tabular Q-learning to S, A, R, S0:
Q(S, A)  Q(S, A) + ↵
⇥
R + γ maxa Q(S0, a) −Q(S, A)
⇤
In addition to the uniﬁed view of planning and learning methods, a second theme in
this chapter is the beneﬁts of planning in small, incremental steps. This enables planning
to be interrupted or redirected at any time with little wasted computation, which appears
to be a key requirement for eﬃciently intermixing planning with acting and with learning
of the model. Planning in very small steps may be the most eﬃcient approach even on
pure planning problems if the problem is too large to be solved exactly.
8.2
Dyna: Integrated Planning, Acting, and Learning
When planning is done online, while interacting with the environment, a number of
interesting issues arise. New information gained from the interaction may change the
model and thereby interact with planning. It may be desirable to customize the planning
process in some way to the states or decisions currently under consideration, or expected


--- Page 184 ---

162
Chapter 8: Planning and Learning with Tabular Methods
in the near future. If decision making and model learning are both computation-intensive
processes, then the available computational resources may need to be divided between
them. To begin exploring these issues, in this section we present Dyna-Q, a simple
architecture integrating the major functions needed in an online planning agent. Each
function appears in Dyna-Q in a simple, almost trivial, form. In subsequent sections we
elaborate some of the alternate ways of achieving each function and the trade-o↵s between
them. For now, we seek merely to illustrate the ideas and stimulate your intuition.
Within a planning agent, there are at least two roles for real experience: it can be
used to improve the model (to make it more accurately match the real environment)
and it can be used to directly improve the value function and policy using the kinds of
planning
value/policy
experience
model
model
learning
acting
direct
RL
reinforcement learning methods we have discussed
in previous chapters. The former we call model-
learning, and the latter we call direct reinforcement
learning (direct RL). The possible relationships
between experience, model, values, and policy are
summarized in the diagram to the right. Each ar-
row shows a relationship of inﬂuence and presumed
improvement. Note how experience can improve
value functions and policies either directly or in-
directly via the model. It is the latter, which is
sometimes called indirect reinforcement learning,
that is involved in planning.
Both direct and indirect methods have advantages and disadvantages. Indirect methods
often make fuller use of a limited amount of experience and thus achieve a better policy
with fewer environmental interactions. On the other hand, direct methods are much
simpler and are not a↵ected by biases in the design of the model. Some have argued
that indirect methods are always superior to direct ones, while others have argued that
direct methods are responsible for most human and animal learning. Related debates
in psychology and artiﬁcial intelligence concern the relative importance of cognition as
opposed to trial-and-error learning, and of deliberative planning as opposed to reactive
decision making (see Chapter 14 for discussion of some of these issues from the perspective
of psychology). Our view is that the contrast between the alternatives in all these debates
has been exaggerated, that more insight can be gained by recognizing the similarities
between these two sides than by opposing them. For example, in this book we have
emphasized the deep similarities between dynamic programming and temporal-di↵erence
methods, even though one was designed for planning and the other for model-free learning.
Dyna-Q includes all of the processes shown in the diagram above—planning, acting,
model-learning, and direct RL—all occurring continually. The planning method is the
random-sample one-step tabular Q-planning method on page 161. The direct RL method
is one-step tabular Q-learning. The model-learning method is also table-based and assumes
the environment is deterministic. After each transition St, At ! Rt+1, St+1, the model
records in its table entry for St, At the prediction that Rt+1, St+1 will deterministically
follow. Thus, if the model is queried with a state–action pair that has been experienced
before, it simply returns the last-observed next state and next reward as its prediction.


--- Page 185 ---

8.2. Dyna: Integrated Planning, Acting, and Learning
163
During planning, the Q-planning algorithm randomly samples only from state–action
pairs that have previously been experienced (in Step 1), so the model is never queried
with a pair about which it has no information.
The overall architecture of Dyna agents, of which the Dyna-Q algorithm is one example,
is shown in Figure 8.1. The central column represents the basic interaction between
agent and environment, giving rise to a trajectory of real experience. The arrow on the
left of the ﬁgure represents direct reinforcement learning operating on real experience to
improve the value function and the policy. On the right are model-based processes. The
model is learned from real experience and gives rise to simulated experience. We use the
term search control to refer to the process that selects the starting states and actions
for the simulated experiences generated by the model. Finally, planning is achieved by
applying reinforcement learning methods to the simulated experiences just as if they had
really happened. Typically, as in Dyna-Q, the same reinforcement learning method is
used both for learning from real experience and for planning from simulated experience.
The reinforcement learning method is thus the “ﬁnal common path” for both learning
and planning. Learning and planning are deeply integrated in the sense that they share
almost all the same machinery, di↵ering only in the source of their experience.
real
direct RL
update
Model
planning update
search
control
Policy/value functions
experience
model
learning
Environment
simulated
experience
Figure 8.1: The general Dyna Architecture. Real experience, passing back and forth between
the environment and the policy, a↵ects policy and value functions in much the same way as does
simulated experience generated by the model of the environment.
Conceptually, planning, acting, model-learning, and direct RL occur simultaneously
and in parallel in Dyna agents. For concreteness and implementation on a serial computer,
however, we fully specify the order in which they occur within a time step. In Dyna-Q,
the acting, model-learning, and direct RL processes require little computation, and we
assume they consume just a fraction of the time. The remaining time in each step can be
devoted to the planning process, which is inherently computation-intensive. Let us assume
that there is time in each step, after acting, model-learning, and direct RL, to complete


--- Page 186 ---

164
Chapter 8: Planning and Learning with Tabular Methods
n iterations (Steps 1–3) of the Q-planning algorithm. In the pseudocode algorithm for
Dyna-Q in the box below, Model(s, a) denotes the contents of the model (predicted
next state and reward) for state–action pair (s, a). Direct reinforcement learning, model-
learning, and planning are implemented by steps (d), (e), and (f), respectively. If (e) and
(f) were omitted, the remaining algorithm would be one-step tabular Q-learning.
Tabular Dyna-Q
Initialize Q(s, a) and Model(s, a) for all s 2 S and a 2 A(s)
Loop forever:
(a) S  current (nonterminal) state
(b) A  "-greedy(S, Q)
(c) Take action A; observe resultant reward, R, and state, S0
(d) Q(S, A)  Q(S, A) + ↵
⇥
R + γ maxa Q(S0, a) −Q(S, A)
⇤
(e) Model(S, A)  R, S0 (assuming deterministic environment)
(f) Loop repeat n times:
S  random previously observed state
A  random action previously taken in S
R, S0  Model(S, A)
Q(S, A)  Q(S, A) + ↵
⇥
R + γ maxa Q(S0, a) −Q(S, A)
⇤
Example 8.1: Dyna Maze Consider the simple maze shown inset in Figure 8.2. In
each of the 47 states there are four actions, up, down, right, and left, which take the
agent deterministically to the corresponding neighboring states, except when movement
is blocked by an obstacle or the edge of the maze, in which case the agent remains where
it is. Reward is zero on all transitions, except those into the goal state, on which it is +1.
After reaching the goal state (G), the agent returns to the start state (S) to begin a new
episode. This is a discounted, episodic task with γ = 0.95.
The main part of Figure 8.2 shows average learning curves from an experiment in
which Dyna-Q agents were applied to the maze task. The initial action values were zero,
the step-size parameter was ↵= 0.1, and the exploration parameter was " = 0.1. When
selecting greedily among actions, ties were broken randomly. The agents varied in the
number of planning steps, n, they performed per real step. For each n, the curves show
the number of steps taken by the agent to reach the goal in each episode, averaged over 30
repetitions of the experiment. In each repetition, the initial seed for the random number
generator was held constant across algorithms. Because of this, the ﬁrst episode was
exactly the same (about 1700 steps) for all values of n, and its data are not shown in
the ﬁgure. After the ﬁrst episode, performance improved for all values of n, but much
more rapidly for larger values. Recall that the n = 0 agent is a nonplanning agent, using
only direct reinforcement learning (one-step tabular Q-learning). This was by far the
slowest agent on this problem, despite the fact that the parameter values (↵and ") were
optimized for it. The nonplanning agent took about 25 episodes to reach ("-)optimal
performance, whereas the n = 5 agent took about ﬁve episodes, and the n = 50 agent
took only three episodes.


--- Page 187 ---

8.2. Dyna: Integrated Planning, Acting, and Learning
165
2
800
600
400
200
14
20
10
30
40
50
 
 
0 planning steps
(direct RL only)
Episodes
Steps
per
episode
5 planning steps
 
 
50 planning steps
S
G
actions
Figure 8.2: A simple maze (inset) and the average learning curves for Dyna-Q agents varying
in their number of planning steps (n) per real step. The task is to travel from S to G as quickly
as possible.
Figure 8.3 shows why the planning agents found the solution so much faster than
the nonplanning agent. Shown are the policies found by the n = 0 and n = 50 agents
halfway through the second episode. Without planning (n = 0), each episode adds only
one additional step to the policy, and so only one step (the last) has been learned so far.
With planning, again only one step is learned during the ﬁrst episode, but here during
the second episode an extensive policy has been developed that by the end of the episode
will reach almost back to the start state. This policy is built by the planning process
while the agent is still wandering near the start state. By the end of the third episode a
complete optimal policy will have been found and perfect performance attained.
S
G
S
G
WITHOUT PLANNING ( =0)
WITH PLANNING ( =50)
n
n
Figure 8.3: Policies found by planning and nonplanning Dyna-Q agents halfway through the
second episode. The arrows indicate the greedy action in each state; if no arrow is shown for a
state, then all of its action values were equal. The black square indicates the location of the
agent.


--- Page 188 ---

166
Chapter 8: Planning and Learning with Tabular Methods
In Dyna-Q, learning and planning are accomplished by exactly the same algorithm,
operating on real experience for learning and on simulated experience for planning.
Because planning proceeds incrementally, it is trivial to intermix planning and acting.
Both proceed as fast as they can. The agent is always reactive and always deliberative,
responding instantly to the latest sensory information and yet always planning in the
background. Also ongoing in the background is the model-learning process. As new
information is gained, the model is updated to better match reality. As the model changes,
the ongoing planning process will gradually compute a di↵erent way of behaving to match
the new model.
Exercise 8.1 The nonplanning method looks particularly poor in Figure 8.3 because it is
a one-step method; a method using multi-step bootstrapping would do better. Do you
think one of the multi-step bootstrapping methods from Chapter 7 could do as well as
the Dyna method? Explain why or why not.
⇤
8.3
When the Model Is Wrong
In the maze example presented in the previous section, the changes in the model were
relatively modest. The model started out empty, and was then ﬁlled only with exactly
correct information. In general, we cannot expect to be so fortunate. Models may be
incorrect because the environment is stochastic and only a limited number of samples
have been observed, or because the model was learned using function approximation that
has generalized imperfectly, or simply because the environment has changed and its new
behavior has not yet been observed. When the model is incorrect, the planning process is
likely to compute a suboptimal policy.
In some cases, the suboptimal policy computed by planning quickly leads to the
discovery and correction of the modeling error. This tends to happen when the model
is optimistic in the sense of predicting greater reward or better state transitions than
are actually possible. The planned policy attempts to exploit these opportunities and in
doing so discovers that they do not exist.
Example 8.2: Blocking Maze
A maze example illustrating this relatively minor
kind of modeling error and recovery from it is shown in Figure 8.4. Initially, there is a
short path from start to goal, to the right of the barrier, as shown in the upper left of the
ﬁgure. After 1000 time steps, the short path is “blocked,” and a longer path is opened up
along the left-hand side of the barrier, as shown in upper right of the ﬁgure. The graph
shows average cumulative reward for a Dyna-Q agent and an enhanced Dyna-Q+ agent
to be described shortly. The ﬁrst part of the graph shows that both Dyna agents found
the short path within 1000 steps. When the environment changed, the graphs become
ﬂat, indicating a period during which the agents obtained no reward because they were
wandering around behind the barrier. After a while, however, they were able to ﬁnd the
new opening and the new optimal behavior.
Greater diﬃculties arise when the environment changes to become better than it was
before, and yet the formerly correct policy does not reveal the improvement. In these
cases the modeling error may not be detected for a long time, if ever.


--- Page 189 ---

8.3. When the Model Is Wrong
167
Cumulative
reward
0
1000
2000
3000
Time steps
150
0
Dyna-Q+
S
G
G
S
Dyna-Q
Figure 8.4: Average performance of Dyna agents on a blocking task. The left environment
was used for the ﬁrst 1000 steps, the right environment for the rest. Dyna-Q+ is Dyna-Q with
an exploration bonus that encourages exploration.
Cumulative
reward
S
G
G
S
0
3000
6000
Time steps
400
0
Dyna-Q+
Dyna-Q
Figure 8.5: Average performance of Dyna agents on
a shortcut task. The left environment was used for the
ﬁrst 3000 steps, the right environment for the rest.
Example 8.3: Shortcut Maze
The problem caused by this kind of
environmental change is illustrated
by the maze example shown in Fig-
ure 8.5. Initially, the optimal path is
to go around the left side of the bar-
rier (upper left). After 3000 steps,
however, a shorter path is opened up
along the right side, without disturb-
ing the longer path (upper right).
The graph shows that the regular
Dyna-Q agent never switched to the
shortcut. In fact, it never realized
that it existed. Its model said that
there was no shortcut, so the more it
planned, the less likely it was to step
to the right and discover it. Even
with an "-greedy policy, it is very
unlikely that an agent will take so
many exploratory actions as to dis-
cover the shortcut.
The general problem here is another version of the conﬂict between exploration and
exploitation. In a planning context, exploration means trying actions that improve the
model, whereas exploitation means behaving in the optimal way given the current model.


--- Page 190 ---

168
Chapter 8: Planning and Learning with Tabular Methods
We want the agent to explore to ﬁnd changes in the environment, but not so much that
performance is greatly degraded. As in the earlier exploration/exploitation conﬂict, there
probably is no solution that is both perfect and practical, but simple heuristics are often
e↵ective.
The Dyna-Q+ agent that did solve the shortcut maze uses one such heuristic. This
agent keeps track for each state–action pair of how many time steps have elapsed since
the pair was last tried in a real interaction with the environment. The more time that
has elapsed, the greater (we might presume) the chance that the dynamics of this pair
has changed and that the model of it is incorrect. To encourage behavior that tests
long-untried actions, a special “bonus reward” is given on simulated experiences involving
these actions. In particular, if the modeled reward for a transition is r, and the transition
has not been tried in ⌧time steps, then planning updates are done as if that transition
produced a reward of r + p⌧, for some small . This encourages the agent to keep
testing all accessible state transitions and even to ﬁnd long sequences of actions in order
to carry out such tests.1 Of course all this testing has its cost, but in many cases, as in the
shortcut maze, this kind of computational curiosity is well worth the extra exploration.
Exercise 8.2
Why did the Dyna agent with exploration bonus, Dyna-Q+, perform
better in the ﬁrst phase as well as in the second phase of the blocking and shortcut
experiments?
⇤
Exercise 8.3 Careful inspection of Figure 8.5 reveals that the di↵erence between Dyna-Q+
and Dyna-Q narrowed slightly over the ﬁrst part of the experiment. What is the reason
for this?
⇤
Exercise 8.4 (programming) The exploration bonus described above actually changes
the estimated values of states and actions. Is this necessary? Suppose the bonus p⌧
was used not in updates, but solely in action selection. That is, suppose the action
selected was always that for which Q(St, a) + 
p
⌧(St, a) was maximal. Carry out a
gridworld experiment that tests and illustrates the strengths and weaknesses of this
alternate approach.
⇤
Exercise 8.5 How might the tabular Dyna-Q algorithm shown on page 164 be modiﬁed
to handle stochastic environments? How might this modiﬁcation perform poorly on
changing environments such as considered in this section? How could the algorithm be
modiﬁed to handle stochastic environments and changing environments?
⇤
8.4
Prioritized Sweeping
In the Dyna agents presented in the preceding sections, simulated transitions are started in
state–action pairs selected uniformly at random from all previously experienced pairs. But
a uniform selection is usually not the best; planning can be much more eﬃcient if simulated
transitions and updates are focused on particular state–action pairs. For example, consider
1The Dyna-Q+ agent was changed in two other ways as well. First, actions that had never been
tried before from a state were allowed to be considered in the planning step (f) of the Tabular Dyna-Q
algorithm in the box above. Second, the initial model for such actions was that they would lead back to
the same state with a reward of zero.


--- Page 191 ---

8.4. Prioritized Sweeping
169
what happens during the second episode of the ﬁrst maze task (Figure 8.3). At the
beginning of the second episode, only the state–action pair leading directly into the goal
has a positive value; the values of all other pairs are still zero. This means that it is
pointless to perform updates along almost all transitions, because they take the agent
from one zero-valued state to another, and thus the updates would have no e↵ect. Only
an update along a transition into the state just prior to the goal, or from it, will change
any values. If simulated transitions are generated uniformly, then many wasteful updates
will be made before stumbling onto one of these useful ones. As planning progresses, the
region of useful updates grows, but planning is still far less eﬃcient than it would be if
focused where it would do the most good. In the much larger problems that are our real
objective, the number of states is so large that an unfocused search would be extremely
ineﬃcient.
This example suggests that search might be usefully focused by working backward from
goal states. Of course, we do not really want to use any methods speciﬁc to the idea of
“goal state.” We want methods that work for general reward functions. Goal states are
just a special case, convenient for stimulating intuition. In general, we want to work back
not just from goal states but from any state whose value has changed. Suppose that the
values are initially correct given the model, as they were in the maze example prior to
discovering the goal. Suppose now that the agent discovers a change in the environment
and changes its estimated value of one state, either up or down. Typically, this will imply
that the values of many other states should also be changed, but the only useful one-step
updates are those of actions that lead directly into the one state whose value has been
changed. If the values of these actions are updated, then the values of the predecessor
states may change in turn. If so, then actions leading into them need to be updated, and
then their predecessor states may have changed. In this way one can work backward
from arbitrary states that have changed in value, either performing useful updates or
terminating the propagation. This general idea might be termed backward focusing of
planning computations.
As the frontier of useful updates propagates backward, it often grows rapidly, producing
many state–action pairs that could usefully be updated. But not all of these will be
equally useful. The values of some states may have changed a lot, whereas others may
have changed little. The predecessor pairs of those that have changed a lot are more
likely to also change a lot. In a stochastic environment, variations in estimated transition
probabilities also contribute to variations in the sizes of changes and in the urgency with
which pairs need to be updated. It is natural to prioritize the updates according to a
measure of their urgency, and perform them in order of priority. This is the idea behind
prioritized sweeping. A queue is maintained of every state–action pair whose estimated
value would change nontrivially if updated , prioritized by the size of the change. When
the top pair in the queue is updated, the e↵ect on each of its predecessor pairs is computed.
If the e↵ect is greater than some small threshold, then the pair is inserted in the queue
with the new priority (if there is a previous entry of the pair in the queue, then insertion
results in only the higher priority entry remaining in the queue). In this way the e↵ects
of changes are eﬃciently propagated backward until quiescence. The full algorithm for
the case of deterministic environments is given in the box on the next page.


--- Page 192 ---

170
Chapter 8: Planning and Learning with Tabular Methods
Prioritized sweeping for a deterministic environment
Initialize Q(s, a), Model(s, a), for all s, a, and PQueue to empty
Loop forever:
(a) S  current (nonterminal) state
(b) A  policy(S, Q)
(c) Take action A; observe resultant reward, R, and state, S0
(d) Model(S, A)  R, S0
(e) P  |R + γ maxa Q(S0, a) −Q(S, A)|.
(f) if P > ✓, then insert S, A into PQueue with priority P
(g) Loop repeat n times, while PQueue is not empty:
S, A  first(PQueue)
R, S0  Model(S, A)
Q(S, A)  Q(S, A) + ↵
⇥
R + γ maxa Q(S0, a) −Q(S, A)
⇤
Loop for all ¯S, ¯A predicted to lead to S:
¯R  predicted reward for ¯S, ¯A, S
P  | ¯R + γ maxa Q(S, a) −Q( ¯S, ¯A)|.
if P > ✓then insert ¯S, ¯A into PQueue with priority P
10
103
104
105
106
107
102
0
47
94
186
376
752 1504 3008 6016
Gridworld size (#states)
Dyna-Q
Prioritized
sweeping
Updates
until
optimal
solution
Example 8.4: Prioritized Sweeping
on Mazes Prioritized sweeping has been
found to dramatically increase the speed
at which optimal solutions are found in
maze tasks, often by a factor of 5 to 10.
A typical example is shown to the right.
These data are for a sequence of maze
tasks of exactly the same structure as the
one shown in Figure 8.2, except that they
vary in the grid resolution. Prioritized
sweeping maintained a decisive advantage
over unprioritized Dyna-Q. Both systems
made at most n = 5 updates per environ-
mental interaction. Adapted from Peng
and Williams (1993).
Extensions of prioritized sweeping to stochastic environments are straightforward. The
model is maintained by keeping counts of the number of times each state–action pair has
been experienced and of what the next states were. It is natural then to update each pair
not with a sample update, as we have been using so far, but with an expected update,
taking into account all possible next states and their probabilities of occurring.
Prioritized sweeping is just one way of distributing computations to improve planning
eﬃciency, and probably not the best way. One of prioritized sweeping’s limitations is that
it uses expected updates, which in stochastic environments may waste lots of computation
on low-probability transitions. As we show in the following section, sample updates


--- Page 193 ---

8.4. Prioritized Sweeping
171
Example 8.5
Prioritized Sweeping for Rod Maneuvering
Start
Goal
The objective in this task is to
maneuver a rod around some awk-
wardly placed obstacles within a
limited rectangular work space to a
goal position in the fewest number
of steps. The rod can be translated
along its long axis or perpendicu-
lar to that axis, or it can be ro-
tated in either direction around its
center. The distance of each move-
ment is approximately 1/20 of the
work space, and the rotation incre-
ment is 10 degrees.
Translations
are deterministic and quantized to
one of 20 ⇥20 positions.
To the
right is shown the obstacles and the
shortest solution from start to goal,
found by prioritized sweeping. This problem is deterministic, but has four actions
and 14,400 potential states (some of these are unreachable because of the obstacles).
This problem is probably too large to be solved with unprioritized methods. Figure
reprinted from Moore and Atkeson (1993).
can in many cases get closer to the true value function with less computation despite
the variance introduced by sampling. Sample updates can win because they break the
overall backing-up computation into smaller pieces—those corresponding to individual
transitions—which then enables it to be focused more narrowly on the pieces that will
have the largest impact. This idea was taken to what may be its logical limit in the “small
backups” introduced by van Seijen and Sutton (2013). These are updates along a single
transition, like a sample update, but based on the probability of the transition without
sampling, as in an expected update. By selecting the order in which small updates
are done it is possible to greatly improve planning eﬃciency beyond that possible with
prioritized sweeping.
We have suggested in this chapter that all kinds of state-space planning can be viewed
as sequences of value updates, varying only in the type of update, expected or sample,
large or small, and in the order in which the updates are done. In this section we have
emphasized backward focusing, but this is just one strategy. For example, another would
be to focus on states according to how easily they can be reached from the states that
are visited frequently under the current policy, which might be called forward focusing.
Peng and Williams (1993) and Barto, Bradtke and Singh (1995) have explored versions
of forward focusing, and the methods introduced in the next few sections take it to an
extreme form.


--- Page 194 ---

172
Chapter 8: Planning and Learning with Tabular Methods
8.5
Expected vs. Sample Updates
The examples in the previous sections give some idea of the range of possibilities for
combining methods of learning and planning. In the rest of this chapter, we analyze some
of the component ideas involved, starting with the relative advantages of expected and
sample updates.
Much of this book has been about di↵erent kinds of value-function updates, and we
have considered a great many varieties. Focusing for the moment on one-step updates,
they vary primarily along three binary dimensions. The ﬁrst two dimensions are whether
they update state values or action values and whether they estimate the value for the
optimal policy or for an arbitrary given policy. These two dimensions give rise to four
classes of updates for approximating the four value functions, q⇤, v⇤, q⇡, and v⇡. The
Value
estimated
Expected updates
(DP)
Sample updates 
(one-step TD)
⇡
s
s0
⇡
r
p
a
q⇡(s, a)
q⇤(s, a)
v⇡(s)
v⇤(s)
s
s0
r
max
a
p
policy evaluation
value iteration
r
s0
s, a
a0
⇡
p
q-policy evaluation
r
s0
s, a
a0
max
p
q-value iteration
s
A
S0
R
R
S0
s, a
A0
R
S0
s, a
max
TD(0)
Sarsa
Q-learning
a0
Figure 8.6: Backup diagrams for all the one-step
updates considered in this book.
other binary dimension is whether the
updates are expected updates, consider-
ing all possible events that might hap-
pen, or sample updates, considering a
single sample of what might happen.
These three binary dimensions give rise
to eight cases, seven of which corre-
spond to speciﬁc algorithms, as shown
in the ﬁgure to the right. (The eighth
case does not seem to correspond to
any useful update.) Any of these one-
step updates can be used in planning
methods. The Dyna-Q agents discussed
earlier use q⇤sample updates, but they
could just as well use q⇤expected up-
dates, or either expected or sample q⇡
updates. The Dyna-AC system uses v⇡
sample updates together with a learning
policy structure (as in Chapter 13). For
stochastic problems, prioritized sweep-
ing is always done using one of the ex-
pected updates.
When we introduced one-step sam-
ple updates in Chapter 6, we presented
them as substitutes for expected up-
dates. In the absence of a distribution
model, expected updates are not pos-
sible, but sample updates can be done
using sample transitions from the envi-
ronment or a sample model. Implicit in
that point of view is that expected up-
dates, if possible, are preferable to sam-
ple updates. But are they? Expected


--- Page 195 ---

8.5. Expected vs. Sample Updates
173
updates certainly yield a better estimate because they are uncorrupted by sampling error,
but they also require more computation, and computation is often the limiting resource
in planning. To properly assess the relative merits of expected and sample updates for
planning we must control for their di↵erent computational requirements.
For concreteness, consider the expected and sample updates for approximating q⇤,
and the special case of discrete states and actions, a table-lookup representation of
the approximate value function, Q, and a model in the form of estimated dynamics,
ˆp(s0, r|s, a). The expected update for a state–action pair, s, a, is:
Q(s, a)  
X
s0,r
ˆp(s0, r|s, a)
h
r + γ max
a0 Q(s0, a0)
i
.
(8.1)
The corresponding sample update for s, a, given a sample next state and reward, S0 and
R (from the model), is the Q-learning-like update:
Q(s, a)  Q(s, a) + ↵
h
R + γ max
a0 Q(S0, a0) −Q(s, a)
i
,
(8.2)
where ↵is the usual positive step-size parameter.
The di↵erence between these expected and sample updates is signiﬁcant to the extent
that the environment is stochastic, speciﬁcally, to the extent that, given a state and
action, many possible next states may occur with various probabilities. If only one next
state is possible, then the expected and sample updates given above are identical (taking
↵= 1). If there are many possible next states, then there may be signiﬁcant di↵erences.
In favor of the expected update is that it is an exact computation, resulting in a new
Q(s, a) whose correctness is limited only by the correctness of the Q(s0, a0) at successor
states. The sample update is in addition a↵ected by sampling error. On the other hand,
the sample update is cheaper computationally because it considers only one next state,
not all possible next states. In practice, the computation required by update operations
is usually dominated by the number of state–action pairs at which Q is evaluated. For a
particular starting pair, s, a, let b be the branching factor (i.e., the number of possible
next states, s0, for which ˆp(s0|s, a) > 0). Then an expected update of this pair requires
roughly b times as much computation as a sample update.
If there is enough time to complete an expected update, then the resulting estimate is
generally better than that of b sample updates because of the absence of sampling error.
But if there is insuﬃcient time to complete an expected update, then sample updates are
always preferable because they at least make some improvement in the value estimate
with fewer than b updates. In a large problem with many state–action pairs, we are often
in the latter situation. With so many state–action pairs, expected updates of all of them
would take a very long time. Before that we may be much better o↵with a few sample
updates at many state–action pairs than with expected updates at a few pairs. Given a
unit of computational e↵ort, is it better devoted to a few expected updates or to b times
as many sample updates?
Figure 8.7 shows the results of an analysis that suggests an answer to this question. It
shows the estimation error as a function of computation time for expected and sample
updates for a variety of branching factors, b. The case considered is that in which all


--- Page 196 ---

174
Chapter 8: Planning and Learning with Tabular Methods
b = 2 (branching factor)
b =10
b =100
b =1000
b =10,000
sample
updates
expected
updates
1
0
0
1b
2b
RMS error
in value
estimate
Number of                         computations
max
a0 Q(s0, a0)
Figure 8.7: Comparison of eﬃciency of expected and sample updates.
b successor states are equally likely and in which the error in the initial estimate is
1. The values at the next states are assumed correct, so the expected update reduces
the error to zero upon its completion. In this case, sample updates reduce the error
according to
q
b−1
bt
where t is the number of sample updates that have been performed
(assuming sample averages, i.e., ↵= 1/t). The key observation is that for moderately
large b the error falls dramatically with a tiny fraction of b updates. For these cases,
many state–action pairs could have their values improved dramatically, to within a few
percent of the e↵ect of an expected update, in the same time that a single state–action
pair could undergo an expected update.
The advantage of sample updates shown in Figure 8.7 is probably an underestimate of
the real e↵ect. In a real problem, the values of the successor states would be estimates
that are themselves updated. By causing estimates to be more accurate sooner, sample
updates will have a second advantage in that the values backed up from the successor
states will be more accurate. These results suggest that sample updates are likely to be
superior to expected updates on problems with large stochastic branching factors and
too many states to be solved exactly.
Exercise 8.6
The analysis above assumed that all of the b possible next states were
equally likely to occur. Suppose instead that the distribution was highly skewed, that
some of the b states were much more likely to occur than most. Would this strengthen or
weaken the case for sample updates over expected updates? Support your answer.
⇤
8.6
Trajectory Sampling
In this section we compare two ways of distributing updates. The classical approach, from
dynamic programming, is to perform sweeps through the entire state (or state–action)
space, updating each state (or state–action pair) once per sweep. This is problematic


--- Page 197 ---

8.6. Trajectory Sampling
175
on large tasks because there may not be time to complete even one sweep. In many
tasks the vast majority of the states are irrelevant because they are visited only under
very poor policies or with very low probability. Exhaustive sweeps implicitly devote
equal time to all parts of the state space rather than focusing where it is needed. As we
discussed in Chapter 4, exhaustive sweeps and the equal treatment of all states that they
imply are not necessary properties of dynamic programming. In principle, updates can
be distributed any way one likes (to assure convergence, all states or state–action pairs
must be visited in the limit an inﬁnite number of times; although an exception to this is
discussed in Section 8.7 below), but in practice exhaustive sweeps are often used.
The second approach is to sample from the state or state–action space according
to some distribution. One could sample uniformly, as in the Dyna-Q agent, but this
would su↵er from some of the same problems as exhaustive sweeps. More appealing
is to distribute updates according to the on-policy distribution, that is, according to
the distribution observed when following the current policy. One advantage of this
distribution is that it is easily generated; one simply interacts with the model, following
the current policy. In an episodic task, one starts in a start state (or according to the
starting-state distribution) and simulates until the terminal state. In a continuing task,
one starts anywhere and just keeps simulating. In either case, sample state transitions
and rewards are given by the model, and sample actions are given by the current policy.
In other words, one simulates explicit individual trajectories and performs updates at the
state or state–action pairs encountered along the way. We call this way of generating
experience and updates trajectory sampling.
It is hard to imagine any eﬃcient way of distributing updates according to the on-policy
distribution other than by trajectory sampling. If one had an explicit representation
of the on-policy distribution, then one could sweep through all states, weighting the
update of each according to the on-policy distribution, but this leaves us again with all
the computational costs of exhaustive sweeps. Possibly one could sample and update
individual state–action pairs from the distribution, but even if this could be done eﬃciently,
what beneﬁt would this provide over simulating trajectories? Even knowing the on-policy
distribution in an explicit form is unlikely. The distribution changes whenever the policy
changes, and computing the distribution requires computation comparable to a complete
policy evaluation. Consideration of such other possibilities makes trajectory sampling
seem both eﬃcient and elegant.
Is the on-policy distribution of updates a good one? Intuitively it seems like a good
choice, at least better than the uniform distribution. For example, if you are learning to
play chess, you study positions that might arise in real games, not random positions of
chess pieces. The latter may be valid states, but to be able to accurately value them is a
di↵erent skill from evaluating positions in real games. We will also see in Part II that the
on-policy distribution has signiﬁcant advantages when function approximation is used.
Whether or not function approximation is used, one might expect on-policy focusing to
signiﬁcantly improve the speed of planning.
Focusing on the on-policy distribution could be beneﬁcial because it causes vast,
uninteresting parts of the space to be ignored, or it could be detrimental because it causes
the same old parts of the space to be updated over and over. We conducted a small


--- Page 198 ---

176
Chapter 8: Planning and Learning with Tabular Methods
experiment to assess the e↵ect empirically. To isolate the e↵ect of the update distribution,
we used entirely one-step expected tabular updates, as deﬁned by (8.1). In the uniform
case, we cycled through all state–action pairs, updating each in place, and in the on-policy
case we simulated episodes, all starting in the same state, updating each state–action pair
that occurred under the current "-greedy policy ("=0.1). The tasks were undiscounted
episodic tasks, generated randomly as follows. From each of the |S| states, two actions
were possible, each of which resulted in one of b next states, all equally likely, with a
di↵erent random selection of b states for each state–action pair. The branching factor, b,
was the same for all state–action pairs. In addition, on all transitions there was a 0.1
probability of transition to the terminal state, ending the episode. The expected reward
on each transition was selected from a Gaussian distribution with mean 0 and variance 1.
b=10
b=3
b=1
b=1
i
on-pol cy
i
on-pol cy
uniform
uniform
 
0
1
2
3
Value of
start state
under
greedy
policy
0
5,000
10,000
15,000
20,000
Computation time, in full backups
0
1
2
3
Value of
start state
under
greedy
policy
0
50,000
100,000
150,000
200,000
Computation time, in full backups
uniform
uniform
on-policy
on-policy
expected updates
expected updates
1,000 STATES
10,000 STATES
Figure 8.8:
Relative eﬃciency of updates dis-
tributed uniformly across the state space versus
focused on simulated on-policy trajectories, each
starting in the same state. Results are for randomly
generated tasks of two sizes and various branching
factors, b.
At any point in the planning process
one can stop and exhaustively compute
v˜⇡(s0), the true value of the start state
under the greedy policy, ˜⇡, given the cur-
rent action-value function Q, as an indi-
cation of how well the agent would do on
a new episode on which it acted greed-
ily (all the while assuming the model is
correct).
The upper part of the ﬁgure to
the right shows results averaged over
200 sample tasks with 1000 states and
branching factors of 1, 3, and 10. The
quality of the policies found is plotted as
a function of the number of expected up-
dates completed. In all cases, sampling
according to the on-policy distribution
resulted in faster planning initially and
retarded planning in the long run. The
e↵ect was stronger, and the initial pe-
riod of faster planning was longer, at
smaller branching factors. In other ex-
periments, we found that these e↵ects
also became stronger as the number of
states increased. For example, the lower
part of the ﬁgure shows results for a
branching factor of 1 for tasks with
10,000 states. In this case the advan-
tage of on-policy focusing is large and
long-lasting.
All of these results make sense. In the
short term, sampling according to the
on-policy distribution helps by focusing
on states that are near descendants of


--- Page 199 ---

8.7. Real-time Dynamic Programming
177
the start state. If there are many states and a small branching factor, this e↵ect will be
large and long-lasting. In the long run, focusing on the on-policy distribution may hurt
because the commonly occurring states all already have their correct values. Sampling
them is useless, whereas sampling other states may actually perform some useful work.
This presumably is why the exhaustive, unfocused approach does better in the long run,
at least for small problems. These results are not conclusive because they are only for
problems generated in a particular, random way, but they do suggest that sampling
according to the on-policy distribution can be a great advantage for large problems, in
particular for problems in which a small subset of the state–action space is visited under
the on-policy distribution.
Exercise 8.7 Some of the graphs in Figure 8.8 seem to be scalloped in their early portions,
particularly the upper graph for b = 1 and the uniform distribution. Why do you think
this is? What aspects of the data shown support your hypothesis?
⇤
Exercise 8.8 (programming) Replicate the experiment whose results are shown in the
lower part of Figure 8.8, then try the same experiment but with b = 3. Discuss the
meaning of your results.
⇤
8.7
Real-time Dynamic Programming
Real-time dynamic programming, or RTDP, is an on-policy trajectory-sampling version of
the value-iteration algorithm of dynamic programming (DP). Because it is closely related
to conventional sweep-based policy iteration, RTDP illustrates in a particularly clear way
some of the advantages that on-policy trajectory sampling can provide. RTDP updates
the values of states visited in actual or simulated trajectories by means of expected
tabular value-iteration updates as deﬁned by (4.10). It is basically the algorithm that
produced the on-policy results shown in Figure 8.8.
The close connection between RTDP and conventional DP makes it possible to derive
some theoretical results by adapting existing theory. RTDP is an example of an asyn-
chronous DP algorithm as described in Section 4.5. Asynchronous DP algorithms are
not organized in terms of systematic sweeps of the state set; they update state values in
any order whatsoever, using whatever values of other states happen to be available. In
RTDP, the update order is dictated by the order states are visited in real or simulated
trajectories.
Start States
Irrelevant States: 
unreachable  from any start state
under any optimal policy
Relevant States
reachable from some start state 
under some optimal policy
If trajectories can start only from a designated
set of start states, and if you are interested in
the prediction problem for a given policy, then on-
policy trajectory sampling allows the algorithm to
completely skip states that cannot be reached by
the given policy from any of the start states: such
states are irrelevant to the prediction problem.
For a control problem, where the goal is to ﬁnd
an optimal policy instead of evaluating a given
policy, there might well be states that cannot be


--- Page 200 ---

178
Chapter 8: Planning and Learning with Tabular Methods
reached by any optimal policy from any of the start states, and there is no need to specify
optimal actions for these irrelevant states. What is needed is an optimal partial policy,
meaning a policy that is optimal for the relevant states but can specify arbitrary actions,
or even be undeﬁned, for the irrelevant states.
But ﬁnding such an optimal partial policy with an on-policy trajectory-sampling
control method, such as Sarsa (Section 6.4), in general requires visiting all state–action
pairs—even those that will turn out to be irrelevant—an inﬁnite number of times. This
can be done, for example, by using exploring starts (Section 5.3). This is true for RTDP
as well: for episodic tasks with exploring starts, RTDP is an asynchronous value-iteration
algorithm that converges to optimal policies for discounted ﬁnite MDPs (and for the
undiscounted case under certain conditions). Unlike the situation for a prediction problem,
it is generally not possible to stop updating any state or state–action pair if convergence
to an optimal policy is important.
The most interesting result for RTDP is that for certain types of problems satisfying
reasonable conditions, RTDP is guaranteed to ﬁnd a policy that is optimal on the relevant
states without visiting every state inﬁnitely often, or even without visiting some states at
all. Indeed, in some problems, only a small fraction of the states need to be visited. This
can be a great advantage for problems with very large state sets, where even a single
sweep may not be feasible.
The tasks for which this result holds are undiscounted episodic tasks for MDPs with
absorbing goal states that generate zero rewards, as described in Section 3.4. At every step
of a real or simulated trajectory, RTDP selects a greedy action (breaking ties randomly)
and applies the expected value-iteration update operation to the current state. It can
also update the values of an arbitrary collection of other states at each step; for example,
it can update the values of states visited in a limited-horizon look-ahead search from the
current state.
For these problems, with each episode beginning in a state randomly chosen from the
set of start states and ending at a goal state, RTDP converges with probability one to a
policy that is optimal for all the relevant states provided: (1) the initial value of every
goal state is zero, (2) there exists at least one policy that guarantees that a goal state
will be reached with probability one from any start state, (3) all rewards for transitions
from non-goal states are strictly negative, and (4) all the initial values are equal to, or
greater than, their optimal values (which can be satisﬁed by simply setting the initial
values of all states to zero). This result was proved by Barto, Bradtke, and Singh (1995)
by combining results for asynchronous DP with results about a heuristic search algorithm
known as learning real-time A* due to Korf (1990).
Tasks having these properties are examples of stochastic optimal path problems, which
are usually stated in terms of cost minimization instead of as reward maximization as
we do here. Maximizing the negative returns in our version is equivalent to minimizing
the costs of paths from a start state to a goal state. Examples of this kind of task are
minimum-time control tasks, where each time step required to reach a goal produces a
reward of −1, or problems like the Golf example in Section 3.5, whose objective is to hit
the hole with the fewest strokes.


--- Page 201 ---

8.7. Real-time Dynamic Programming
179
Example 8.6: RTDP on the Racetrack
The racetrack problem of Exercise 5.12
(page 111) is a stochastic optimal path problem. Comparing RTDP and the conventional
DP value iteration algorithm on an example racetrack problem illustrates some of the
advantages of on-policy trajectory sampling.
Recall from the exercise that an agent has to learn how to drive a car around a turn
like those shown in Figure 5.5 and cross the ﬁnish line as quickly as possible while staying
on the track. Start states are all the zero-speed states on the starting line; the goal states
are all the states that can be reached in one time step by crossing the ﬁnish line from
inside the track. Unlike Exercise 5.12, here there is no limit on the car’s speed, so the
state set is potentially inﬁnite. However, the set of states that can be reached from the
set of start states via any policy is ﬁnite and can be considered to be the state set of the
problem. Each episode begins in a randomly selected start state and ends when the car
crosses the ﬁnish line. The rewards are −1 for each step until the car crosses the ﬁnish
line. If the car hits the track boundary, it is moved back to a random start state, and the
episode continues.
A racetrack similar to the small racetrack on the left of Figure 5.5 has 9,115 states
reachable from start states by any policy, only 599 of which are relevant, meaning that
they are reachable from some start state via some optimal policy. (The number of relevant
states was estimated by counting the states visited while executing optimal actions for
107 episodes.)
The table below compares solving this task by conventional DP and by RTDP. These
results are averages over 25 runs, each begun with a di↵erent random number seed.
Conventional DP in this case is value iteration using exhaustive sweeps of the state set,
with values updated one state at a time in place, meaning that the update for each state
uses the most recent values of the other states (This is the Gauss-Seidel version of value
iteration, which was found to be approximately twice as fast as the Jacobi version on
this problem. See Section 4.8.) No special attention was paid to the ordering of the
updates; other orderings could have produced faster convergence. Initial values were all
zero for each run of both methods. DP was judged to have converged when the maximum
change in a state value over a sweep was less than 10−4, and RTDP was judged to have
converged when the average time to cross the ﬁnish line over 20 episodes appeared to
stabilize at an asymptotic number of steps. This version of RTDP updated only the value
of the current state on each step.
DP
RTDP
Average computation to convergence
28 sweeps
4000 episodes
Average number of updates to convergence
252,784
127,600
Average number of updates per episode
—
31.9
% of states updated 100 times
—
98.45
% of states updated 10 times
—
80.51
% of states updated 0 times
—
3.18
Both methods produced policies averaging between 14 and 15 steps to cross the ﬁnish
line, but RTDP required only roughly half of the updates that DP did. This is the result
of RTDP’s on-policy trajectory sampling. Whereas the value of every state was updated


--- Page 202 ---

180
Chapter 8: Planning and Learning with Tabular Methods
in each sweep of DP, RTDP focused updates on fewer states. In an average run, RTDP
updated the values of 98.45% of the states no more than 100 times and 80.51% of the
states no more than 10 times; the values of about 290 states were not updated at all in
an average run.
Another advantage of RTDP is that as the value function approaches the optimal
value function v⇤, the policy used by the agent to generate trajectories approaches an
optimal policy because it is always greedy with respect to the current value function.
This is in contrast to the situation in conventional value iteration. In practice, value
iteration terminates when the value function changes by only a small amount in a sweep,
which is how we terminated it to obtain the results in the table above. At this point,
the value function closely approximates v⇤, and a greedy policy is close to an optimal
policy. However, it is possible that policies that are greedy with respect to the latest
value function were optimal, or nearly so, long before value iteration terminates. (Recall
from Chapter 4 that optimal policies can be greedy with respect to many di↵erent
value functions, not just v⇤.) Checking for the emergence of an optimal policy before
value iteration converges is not a part of the conventional DP algorithm and requires
considerable additional computation.
In the racetrack example, by running many test episodes after each DP sweep, with
actions selected greedily according to the result of that sweep, it was possible to estimate
the earliest point in the DP computation at which the approximated optimal evaluation
function was good enough so that the corresponding greedy policy was nearly optimal.
For this racetrack, a close-to-optimal policy emerged after 15 sweeps of value iteration, or
after 136,725 value-iteration updates. This is considerably less than the 252,784 updates
DP needed to converge to v⇤, but still more than the 127,600 updates RTDP required.
Although these simulations are certainly not deﬁnitive comparisons of the RTDP with
conventional sweep-based value iteration, they illustrate some of advantages of on-policy
trajectory sampling. Whereas conventional value iteration continued to update the value
of all the states, RTDP strongly focused on subsets of the states that were relevant to
the problem’s objective. This focus became increasingly narrow as learning continued.
Because the convergence theorem for RTDP applies to the simulations, we know that
RTDP eventually would have focused only on relevant states, i.e., on states making up
optimal paths. RTDP achieved nearly optimal control with about 50% of the computation
required by sweep-based value iteration.
8.8
Planning at Decision Time
Planning can be used in at least two ways. The one we have considered so far in this
chapter, typiﬁed by dynamic programming and Dyna, is to use planning to gradually
improve a policy or value function on the basis of simulated experience obtained from a
model (either a sample or a distribution model). Selecting actions is then a matter of
comparing the current state’s action values obtained from a table in the tabular case we
have thus far considered, or by evaluating a mathematical expression in the approximate
methods we consider in Part II below. Well before an action is selected for any current
state St, planning has played a part in improving the table entries, or the function


--- Page 203 ---

8.9. Heuristic Search
181
approximation parameters, needed to select actions for many states, including St. Used
this way, planning is not focused on the current state. We call planning used in this way
background planning.
The other way to use planning is to begin and complete it after encountering each
new state St, as a computation whose output is the selection of a single action At; on
the next step planning begins anew with St+1 to produce At+1, and so on. The simplest,
and almost degenerate, example of this use of planning is when only state values are
available, and an action is selected by comparing the values of model-predicted next states
for each action (or by comparing the values of afterstates as in the tic-tac-toe example
in Chapter 1). More generally, planning used in this way can look much deeper than
one-step-ahead and evaluate action choices leading to many di↵erent predicted state and
reward trajectories. Unlike the ﬁrst use of planning, here planning focuses on a particular
state. We call this decision-time planning.
These two ways of thinking about planning—using simulated experience to gradually
improve a policy or value function, or using simulated experience to select an action for
the current state—can blend together in natural and interesting ways, but they have
tended to be studied separately, and that is a good way to ﬁrst understand them. Let us
now take a closer look at decision-time planning.
Even when planning is only done at decision time, we can still view it, as we did
in Section 8.1, as proceeding from simulated experience to updates and values, and
ultimately to a policy. It is just that now the values and policy are speciﬁc to the current
state and the action choices available there, so much so that the values and policy created
by the planning process are typically discarded after being used to select the current
action. In many applications this is not a great loss because there are very many states
and we are unlikely to return to the same state for a long time. In general, one may
want to do a mix of both: focus planning on the current state and store the results
of planning so as to be that much farther along should one return to the same state
later. Decision-time planning is most useful in applications in which fast responses are
not required. In chess playing programs, for example, one may be permitted seconds or
minutes of computation for each move, and strong programs may plan dozens of moves
ahead within this time. On the other hand, if low latency action selection is the priority,
then one is generally better o↵doing planning in the background to compute a policy
that can then be rapidly applied to each newly encountered state.
8.9
Heuristic Search
The classical state-space planning methods in artiﬁcial intelligence are decision-time
planning methods collectively known as heuristic search. In heuristic search, for each
state encountered, a large tree of possible continuations is considered. The approximate
value function is applied to the leaf nodes and then backed up toward the current state
at the root. The backing up within the search tree is just the same as in the expected
updates with maxes (those for v⇤and q⇤) discussed throughout this book. The backing
up stops at the state–action nodes for the current state. Once the backed-up values of
these nodes are computed, the best of them is chosen as the current action, and then all
backed-up values are discarded.


--- Page 204 ---

182
Chapter 8: Planning and Learning with Tabular Methods
In conventional heuristic search no e↵ort is made to save the backed-up values by
changing the approximate value function. In fact, the value function is generally designed
by people and never changed as a result of search. However, it is natural to consider
allowing the value function to be improved over time, using either the backed-up values
computed during heuristic search or any of the other methods presented throughout
this book. In a sense we have taken this approach all along. Our greedy, "-greedy, and
UCB (Section 2.7) action-selection methods are not unlike heuristic search, albeit on a
smaller scale. For example, to compute the greedy action given a model and a state-value
function, we must look ahead from each possible action to each possible next state, take
into account the rewards and estimated values, and then pick the best action. Just as
in conventional heuristic search, this process computes backed-up values of the possible
actions, but does not attempt to save them. Thus, heuristic search can be viewed as an
extension of the idea of a greedy policy beyond a single step.
The point of searching deeper than one step is to obtain better action selections. If one
has a perfect model and an imperfect action-value function, then in fact deeper search
will usually yield better policies.2 Certainly, if the search is all the way to the end of
the episode, then the e↵ect of the imperfect value function is eliminated, and the action
determined in this way must be optimal. If the search is of suﬃcient depth k such that γk
is very small, then the actions will be correspondingly near optimal. On the other hand,
the deeper the search, the more computation is required, usually resulting in a slower
response time. A good example is provided by Tesauro’s grandmaster-level backgammon
player, TD-Gammon (Section 16.1). This system used TD learning to learn an afterstate
value function through many games of self-play, using a form of heuristic search to make
its moves. As a model, TD-Gammon used a priori knowledge of the probabilities of dice
rolls and the assumption that the opponent always selected the actions that TD-Gammon
rated as best for it. Tesauro found that the deeper the heuristic search, the better the
moves made by TD-Gammon, but the longer it took to make each move. Backgammon
has a large branching factor, yet moves must be made within a few seconds. It was
only feasible to search ahead selectively a few steps, but even so the search resulted in
signiﬁcantly better action selections.
We should not overlook the most obvious way in which heuristic search focuses updates:
on the current state. Much of the e↵ectiveness of heuristic search is due to its search tree
being tightly focused on the states and actions that might immediately follow the current
state. You may spend more of your life playing chess than checkers, but when you play
checkers, it pays to think about checkers and about your particular checkers position,
your likely next moves, and successor positions. No matter how you select actions, it
is these states and actions that are of highest priority for updates and where you most
urgently want your approximate value function to be accurate. Not only should your
computation be preferentially devoted to imminent events, but so should your limited
memory resources. In chess, for example, there are far too many possible positions to
store distinct value estimates for each of them, but chess programs based on heuristic
search can easily store distinct estimates for the millions of positions they encounter
2There are interesting exceptions to this (see Pearl, 1984).


--- Page 205 ---

8.10. Rollout Algorithms
183
looking ahead from a single position. This great focusing of memory and computational
resources on the current decision is presumably the reason why heuristic search can be so
e↵ective.
The distribution of updates can be altered in similar ways to focus on the current
state and its likely successors. As a limiting case we might use exactly the methods of
heuristic search to construct a search tree, and then perform the individual, one-step
updates from bottom up, as suggested by Figure 8.9. If the updates are ordered in this
way and a tabular representation is used, then exactly the same overall update would
be achieved as in depth-ﬁrst heuristic search. Any state-space search can be viewed in
this way as the piecing together of a large number of individual one-step updates. Thus,
the performance improvement observed with deeper searches is not due to the use of
multistep updates as such. Instead, it is due to the focus and concentration of updates
on states and actions immediately downstream from the current state. By devoting a
large amount of computation speciﬁcally relevant to the candidate actions, decision-time
planning can produce better decisions than can be produced by relying on unfocused
updates.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Figure 8.9: Heuristic search can be implemented as a sequence of one-step updates (shown
here outlined in blue) backing up values from the leaf nodes toward the root. The ordering
shown here is for a selective depth-ﬁrst search.
8.10
Rollout Algorithms
Rollout algorithms are decision-time planning algorithms based on Monte Carlo control
applied to simulated trajectories that all begin at the current environment state. They
estimate action values for a given policy by averaging the returns of many simulated
trajectories that start with each possible action and then follow the given policy. When
the action-value estimates are considered to be accurate enough, the action (or one of the


--- Page 206 ---

184
Chapter 8: Planning and Learning with Tabular Methods
actions) having the highest estimated value is executed, after which the process is carried
out anew from the resulting next state. As explained by Tesauro and Galperin (1997),
who experimented with rollout algorithms for playing backgammon, the term “rollout”
comes from estimating the value of a backgammon position by playing out, i.e., “rolling
out,” the position many times to the game’s end with randomly generated sequences of
dice rolls, where the moves of both players are made by some ﬁxed policy.
Unlike the Monte Carlo control algorithms described in Chapter 5, the goal of a
rollout algorithm is not to estimate a complete optimal action-value function, q⇤, or a
complete action-value function, q⇡, for a given policy ⇡. Instead, they produce Monte
Carlo estimates of action values only for each current state and for a given policy usually
called the rollout policy. As decision-time planning algorithms, rollout algorithms make
immediate use of these action-value estimates, then discard them. This makes rollout
algorithms relatively simple to implement because there is no need to sample outcomes
for every state-action pair, and there is no need to approximate a function over either
the state space or the state-action space.
What then do rollout algorithms accomplish?
The policy improvement theorem
described in Section 4.2 tells us that given any two policies ⇡and ⇡0 that are identical
except that ⇡0(s) = a 6= ⇡(s) for some state s, if q⇡(s, a) ≥v⇡(s), then policy ⇡0 is as good
as, or better, than ⇡. Moreover, if the inequality is strict, then ⇡0 is in fact better than ⇡.
This applies to rollout algorithms where s is the current state and ⇡is the rollout policy.
Averaging the returns of the simulated trajectories produces estimates of q⇡(s, a0) for
each action a0 2 A(s). Then the policy that selects an action in s that maximizes these
estimates and thereafter follows ⇡is a good candidate for a policy that improves over
⇡. The result is like one step of the policy-iteration algorithm of dynamic programming
discussed in Section 4.3 (though it is more like one step of asynchronous value iteration
described in Section 4.5 because it changes the action for just the current state).
In other words, the aim of a rollout algorithm is to improve upon the rollout policy;
not to ﬁnd an optimal policy. Experience has shown that rollout algorithms can be
surprisingly e↵ective. For example, Tesauro and Galperin (1997) were surprised by the
dramatic improvements in backgammon playing ability produced by the rollout method.
In some applications, a rollout algorithm can produce good performance even if the
rollout policy is completely random. But the performance of the improved policy depends
on properties of the rollout policy and the ranking of actions produced by the Monte
Carlo value estimates. Intuition suggests that the better the rollout policy and the more
accurate the value estimates, the better the policy produced by a rollout algorithm is
likely be (but see Gelly and Silver, 2007).
This involves important tradeo↵s because better rollout policies typically mean that
more time is needed to simulate enough trajectories to obtain good value estimates.
As decision-time planning methods, rollout algorithms usually have to meet strict time
constraints. The computation time needed by a rollout algorithm depends on the number
of actions that have to be evaluated for each decision, the number of time steps in the
simulated trajectories needed to obtain useful sample returns, the time it takes the rollout
policy to make decisions, and the number of simulated trajectories needed to obtain good
Monte Carlo action-value estimates.


--- Page 207 ---

8.11. Monte Carlo Tree Search
185
Balancing these factors is important in any application of rollout methods, though there
are several ways to ease the challenge. Because the Monte Carlo trials are independent of
one another, it is possible to run many trials in parallel on separate processors. Another
approach is to truncate the simulated trajectories short of complete episodes, correcting
the truncated returns by means of a stored evaluation function (which brings into play
all that we have said about truncated returns and updates in the preceding chapters).
It is also possible, as Tesauro and Galperin (1997) suggest, to monitor the Monte Carlo
simulations and prune away candidate actions that are unlikely to turn out to be the
best, or whose values are close enough to that of the current best that choosing them
instead would make no real di↵erence (though Tesauro and Galperin point out that this
would complicate a parallel implementation).
We do not ordinarily think of rollout algorithms as learning algorithms because they
do not maintain long-term memories of values or policies. However, these algorithms take
advantage of some of the features of reinforcement learning that we have emphasized
in this book.
As instances of Monte Carlo control, they estimate action values by
averaging the returns of a collection of sample trajectories, in this case trajectories of
simulated interactions with a sample model of the environment. In this way they are
like reinforcement learning algorithms in avoiding the exhaustive sweeps of dynamic
programming by trajectory sampling, and in avoiding the need for distribution models
by relying on sample, instead of expected, updates. Finally, rollout algorithms take
advantage of the policy improvement property by acting greedily with respect to the
estimated action values.
8.11
Monte Carlo Tree Search
Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) is a recent and strikingly successful example of decision-
time planning. At its base, MCTS is a rollout algorithm as described above, but enhanced
by the addition of a means for accumulating value estimates obtained from the Monte
Carlo simulations in order to successively direct simulations toward more highly-rewarding
trajectories. MCTS is largely responsible for the improvement in computer Go from
a weak amateur level in 2005 to a grandmaster level (6 dan or more) in 2015. Many
variations of the basic algorithm have been developed, including a variant that we discuss
in Section 16.6 that was critical for the stunning 2016 victories of the program AlphaGo
over an 18-time world champion Go player. MCTS has proved to be e↵ective in a wide
variety of competitive settings, including general game playing (e.g., see Finnsson and
Bj¨ornsson, 2008; Genesereth and Thielscher, 2014), but it is not limited to games; it can
be e↵ective for single-agent sequential decision problems if there is an environment model
simple enough for fast multistep simulation.
MCTS is executed after encountering each new state to select the agent’s action for
that state; it is executed again to select the action for the next state, and so on. As in a
rollout algorithm, each execution is an iterative process that simulates many trajectories
starting from the current state and running to a terminal state (or until discounting
makes any further reward negligible as a contribution to the return). The core idea
of MCTS is to successively focus multiple simulations starting at the current state by


--- Page 208 ---

186
Chapter 8: Planning and Learning with Tabular Methods
extending the initial portions of trajectories that have received high evaluations from
earlier simulations. MCTS does not have to retain approximate value functions or policies
from one action selection to the next, though in many implementations it retains selected
action values likely to be useful for its next execution.
For the most part, the actions in the simulated trajectories are generated using a simple
policy, usually called a rollout policy as it is for simpler rollout algorithms. When both
the rollout policy and the model do not require a lot of computation, many simulated
trajectories can be generated in a short period of time. As in any tabular Monte Carlo
method, the value of a state–action pair is estimated as the average of the (simulated)
returns from that pair. Monte Carlo value estimates are maintained only for the subset
of state–action pairs that are most likely to be reached in a few steps, which form a tree
rooted at the current state, as illustrated in Figure 8.10. MCTS incrementally extends
the tree by adding nodes representing states that look promising based on the results
of the simulated trajectories. Any simulated trajectory will pass through the tree and
then exit it at some leaf node. Outside the tree and at the leaf nodes the rollout policy is
used for action selections, but at the states inside the tree something better is possible.
For these states we have value estimates for at least some of the actions, so we can pick
among them using an informed policy, called the tree policy, that balances exploration
Selection
Simulation
Expansion
Backup
Repeat while time remains 
Tree
 Policy
Rollout
Policy
Figure 8.10: Monte Carlo Tree Search. When the environment changes to a new state, MCTS
executes as many iterations as possible before an action needs to be selected, incrementally
building a tree whose root node represents the current state. Each iteration consists of the four
operations Selection, Expansion (though possibly skipped on some iterations), Simulation,
and Backup, as explained in the text and illustrated by the bold arrows in the trees. Adapted
from Chaslot, Bakkes, Szita, and Spronck (2008).


--- Page 209 ---

8.11. Monte Carlo Tree Search
187
and exploitation. For example, the tree policy could select actions using an "-greedy or
UCB selection rule (Chapter 2).
In more detail, each iteration of a basic version of MCTS consists of the following four
steps as illustrated in Figure 8.10:
1. Selection. Starting at the root node, a tree policy based on the action values
attached to the edges of the tree traverses the tree to select a leaf node.
2. Expansion. On some iterations (depending on details of the application), the tree
is expanded from the selected leaf node by adding one or more child nodes reached
from the selected node via unexplored actions.
3. Simulation. From the selected node, or from one of its newly-added child nodes
(if any), simulation of a complete episode is run with actions selected by the rollout
policy. The result is a Monte Carlo trial with actions selected ﬁrst by the tree
policy and beyond the tree by the rollout policy.
4. Backup. The return generated by the simulated episode is backed up to update,
or to initialize, the action values attached to the edges of the tree traversed by
the tree policy in this iteration of MCTS. No values are saved for the states and
actions visited by the rollout policy beyond the tree. Figure 8.10 illustrates this by
showing a backup from the terminal state of the simulated trajectory directly to the
state–action node in the tree where the rollout policy began (though in general, the
entire return over the simulated trajectory is backed up to this state–action node).
MCTS continues executing these four steps, starting each time at the tree’s root node,
until no more time is left, or some other computational resource is exhausted. Then,
ﬁnally, an action from the root node (which still represents the current state of the
environment) is selected according to some mechanism that depends on the accumulated
statistics in the tree; for example, it may be an action having the largest action value
of all the actions available from the root state, or perhaps the action with the largest
visit count to avoid selecting outliers. This is the action MCTS actually selects. After
the environment transitions to a new state, MCTS is run again, sometimes starting
with a tree of a single root node representing the new state, but often starting with a
tree containing any descendants of this node left over from the tree constructed by the
previous execution of MCTS; all the remaining nodes are discarded, along with the action
values associated with them.
MCTS was ﬁrst proposed to select moves in programs playing two-person competitive
games, such as Go. For game playing, each simulated episode is one complete play of the
game in which both players select actions by the tree and rollout policies. Section 16.6
describes an extension of MCTS used in the AlphaGo program that combines the Monte
Carlo evaluations of MCTS with action values learned by a deep artiﬁcial neural network
via self-play reinforcement learning.
Relating MCTS to the reinforcement learning principles we describe in this book
provides some insight into how it achieves such impressive results. At its base, MCTS is
a decision-time planning algorithm based on Monte Carlo control applied to simulations


--- Page 210 ---

188
Chapter 8: Planning and Learning with Tabular Methods
that start from the root state; that is, it is a kind of rollout algorithm as described in
the previous section. It therefore beneﬁts from online, incremental, sample-based value
estimation and policy improvement. Beyond this, it saves action-value estimates attached
to the tree edges and updates them using reinforcement learning’s sample updates. This
has the e↵ect of focusing the Monte Carlo trials on trajectories whose initial segments
are common to high-return trajectories previously simulated. Further, by incrementally
expanding the tree, MCTS e↵ectively grows a lookup table to store a partial action-value
function, with memory allocated to the estimated values of state–action pairs visited in
the initial segments of high-yielding sample trajectories. MCTS thus avoids the problem
of globally approximating an action-value function while it retains the beneﬁt of using
past experience to guide exploration.
The striking success of decision-time planning by MCTS has deeply inﬂuenced artiﬁcial
intelligence, and many researchers are studying modiﬁcations and extensions of the basic
procedure for use in both games and single-agent applications.
8.12
Summary of the Chapter
Planning requires a model of the environment. A distribution model consists of the
probabilities of next states and rewards for possible actions; a sample model produces
single transitions and rewards generated according to these probabilities.
Dynamic
programming requires a distribution model because it uses expected updates, which involve
computing expectations over all the possible next states and rewards. A sample model,
on the other hand, is what is needed to simulate interacting with the environment during
which sample updates, like those used by many reinforcement learning algorithms, can be
used. Sample models are generally much easier to obtain than distribution models.
We have presented a perspective emphasizing the surprisingly close relationships be-
tween planning optimal behavior and learning optimal behavior. Both involve estimating
the same value functions, and in both cases it is natural to update the estimates incre-
mentally, in a long series of small backing-up operations. This makes it straightforward
to integrate learning and planning processes simply by allowing both to update the same
estimated value function. In addition, any of the learning methods can be converted into
planning methods simply by applying them to simulated (model-generated) experience
rather than to real experience. In this case learning and planning become even more
similar; they are possibly identical algorithms operating on two di↵erent sources of
experience.
It is straightforward to integrate incremental planning methods with acting and model-
learning.
Planning, acting, and model-learning interact in a circular fashion (as in
the diagram on page 162), each producing what the other needs to improve; no other
interaction among them is either required or prohibited. The most natural approach
is for all processes to proceed asynchronously and in parallel. If the processes must
share computational resources, then the division can be handled almost arbitrarily—by
whatever organization is most convenient and eﬃcient for the task at hand.
In this chapter we have touched upon a number of dimensions of variation among
state-space planning methods. One dimension is the variation in the size of updates. The


--- Page 211 ---

8.13. Summary of Part I: Dimensions
189
smaller the updates, the more incremental the planning methods can be. Among the
smallest updates are one-step sample updates, as in Dyna. Another important dimension
is the distribution of updates, that is, of the focus of search. Prioritized sweeping focuses
backward on the predecessors of states whose values have recently changed. On-policy
trajectory sampling focuses on states or state–action pairs that the agent is likely to
encounter when controlling its environment. This can allow computation to skip over
parts of the state space that are irrelevant to the prediction or control problem. Real-
time dynamic programming, an on-policy trajectory sampling version of value iteration,
illustrates some of the advantages this strategy has over conventional sweep-based policy
iteration.
Planning can also focus forward from pertinent states, such as states actually encoun-
tered during an agent-environment interaction. The most important form of this is when
planning is done at decision time, that is, as part of the action-selection process. Classical
heuristic search as studied in artiﬁcial intelligence is an example of this. Other examples
are rollout algorithms and Monte Carlo Tree Search that beneﬁt from online, incremental,
sample-based value estimation and policy improvement.
8.13
Summary of Part I: Dimensions
This chapter concludes Part I of this book. In it we have tried to present reinforcement
learning not as a collection of individual methods, but as a coherent set of ideas cutting
across methods. Each idea can be viewed as a dimension along which methods vary. The
set of such dimensions spans a large space of possible methods. By exploring this space
at the level of dimensions we hope to obtain the broadest and most lasting understanding.
In this section we use the concept of dimensions in method space to recapitulate the view
of reinforcement learning developed so far in this book.
All of the methods we have explored so far in this book have three key ideas in common:
ﬁrst, they all seek to estimate value functions; second, they all operate by backing up
values along actual or possible state trajectories; and third, they all follow the general
strategy of generalized policy iteration (GPI), meaning that they maintain an approximate
value function and an approximate policy, and they continually try to improve each on the
basis of the other. These three ideas are central to the subjects covered in this book. We
suggest that value functions, backing up value updates, and GPI are powerful organizing
principles potentially relevant to any model of intelligence, whether artiﬁcial or natural.
Two of the most important dimensions along which the methods vary are shown in
Figure 8.11. These dimensions have to do with the kind of update used to improve the
value function. The horizontal dimension is whether they are sample updates (based on a
sample trajectory) or expected updates (based on a distribution of possible trajectories).
Expected updates require a distribution model, whereas sample updates need only a
sample model, or can be done from actual experience with no model at all (another
dimension of variation). The vertical dimension of Figure 8.11 corresponds to the depth
of updates, that is, to the degree of bootstrapping. At three of the four corners of the
space are the three primary methods for estimating values: dynamic programming, TD,
and Monte Carlo. Along the left edge of the space are the sample-update methods,


--- Page 212 ---

190
Chapter 8: Planning and Learning with Tabular Methods
width
of update
depth
(length)
of update
Temporal-
difference
learning
Dynamic
programming
Monte
Carlo
...
Exhaustive
search
Figure 8.11: A slice through the space of reinforcement learning methods, highlighting the
two of the most important dimensions explored in Part I of this book: the depth and width of
the updates.
ranging from one-step TD updates to full-return Monte Carlo updates. Between these
is a spectrum including methods based on n-step updates (and in Chapter 12 we will
extend this to mixtures of n-step updates such as the λ-updates implemented by eligibility
traces).
Dynamic programming methods are shown in the extreme upper-right corner of the
space because they involve one-step expected updates. The lower-right corner is the
extreme case of expected updates so deep that they run all the way to terminal states
(or, in a continuing task, until discounting has reduced the contribution of any further
rewards to a negligible level). This is the case of exhaustive search. Intermediate methods
along this dimension include heuristic search and related methods that search and update
up to a limited depth, perhaps selectively. There are also methods that are intermediate
along the horizontal dimension. These include methods that mix expected and sample
updates, as well as the possibility of methods that mix samples and distributions within
a single update. The interior of the square is ﬁlled in to represent the space of all such
intermediate methods.
A third dimension that we have emphasized in this book is the binary distinction
between on-policy and o↵-policy methods. In the former case, the agent learns the value
function for the policy it is currently following, whereas in the latter case it learns the


--- Page 213 ---

8.13. Summary of Part I: Dimensions
191
value function for the policy for a di↵erent policy, often the one that the agent currently
thinks is best. The policy generating behavior is typically di↵erent from what is currently
thought best because of the need to explore. This third dimension might be visualized as
perpendicular to the plane of the page in Figure 8.11.
In addition to the three dimensions just discussed, we have identiﬁed a number of
others throughout the book:
Deﬁnition of return Is the task episodic or continuing, discounted or undiscounted?
Action values vs. state values vs. afterstate values What kind of values should
be estimated? If only state values are estimated, then either a model or a separate
policy (as in actor–critic methods) is required for action selection.
Action selection/exploration How are actions selected to ensure a suitable trade-o↵
between exploration and exploitation? We have considered only the simplest ways to
do this: "-greedy, optimistic initialization of values, soft-max, and upper conﬁdence
bound.
Synchronous vs. asynchronous Are the updates for all states performed simultane-
ously or one by one in some order?
Real vs. simulated Should one update based on real experience or simulated experi-
ence? If both, how much of each?
Location of updates What states or state–action pairs should be updated? Model-
free methods can choose only among the states and state–action pairs actually
encountered, but model-based methods can choose arbitrarily. There are many
possibilities here.
Timing of updates Should updates be done as part of selecting actions, or only after-
ward?
Memory for updates How long should updated values be retained? Should they be
retained permanently, or only while computing an action selection, as in heuristic
search?
Of course, these dimensions are neither exhaustive nor mutually exclusive. Individual
algorithms di↵er in many other ways as well, and many algorithms lie in several places
along several dimensions. For example, Dyna methods use both real and simulated
experience to a↵ect the same value function. It is also perfectly sensible to maintain
multiple value functions computed in di↵erent ways or over di↵erent state and action
representations. These dimensions do, however, constitute a coherent set of ideas for
describing and exploring a wide space of possible methods.
The most important dimension not mentioned here, and not covered in Part I of
this book, is that of function approximation. Function approximation can be viewed as
an orthogonal spectrum of possibilities ranging from tabular methods at one extreme
through state aggregation, a variety of linear methods, and then a diverse set of nonlinear
methods. This dimension is explored in Part II.


--- Page 214 ---

192
Chapter 8: Planning and Learning with Tabular Methods
Bibliographical and Historical Remarks
8.1
The overall view of planning and learning presented here has developed gradually
over a number of years, in part by the authors (Sutton, 1990, 1991a, 1991b;
Barto, Bradtke, and Singh, 1991, 1995; Sutton and Pinette, 1985; Sutton and
Barto, 1981b); it has been strongly inﬂuenced by Agre and Chapman (1990; Agre
1988), Bertsekas and Tsitsiklis (1989), Singh (1993), and others. The authors
were also strongly inﬂuenced by psychological studies of latent learning (Tolman,
1932) and by psychological views of the nature of thought (e.g., Galanter and
Gerstenhaber, 1956; Craik, 1943; Campbell, 1960; Dennett, 1978). In Part
III of the book, Section 14.6 relates model-based and model-free methods to
psychological theories of learning and behavior, and Section 15.11 discusses ideas
about how the brain might implement these types of methods.
8.2
The terms direct and indirect, which we use to describe di↵erent kinds of
reinforcement learning, are from the adaptive control literature (e.g., Goodwin
and Sin, 1984), where they are used to make the same kind of distinction. The
term system identiﬁcation is used in adaptive control for what we call model-
learning (e.g., Goodwin and Sin, 1984; Ljung and S¨oderstrom, 1983; Young,
1984). The Dyna architecture is due to Sutton (1990), and the results in this
and the next section are based on results reported there. Barto and Singh
(1990) consider some of the issues in comparing direct and indirect reinforcement
learning methods. Early work extending Dyna to linear function approximation
was done by Sutton, Szepesv´ari, Geramifard, and Bowling (2008) and by Parr,
Li, Taylor, Painter-Wakeﬁeld, and Littman (2008).
8.3
There have been several works with model-based reinforcement learning that take
the idea of exploration bonuses and optimistic initialization to its logical extreme,
in which all incompletely explored choices are assumed maximally rewarding
and optimal paths are computed to test them. The E3 algorithm of Kearns and
Singh (2002) and the R-max algorithm of Brafman and Tennenholtz (2003) are
guaranteed to ﬁnd a near-optimal solution in time polynomial in the number
of states and actions. This is usually too slow for practical algorithms but is
probably the best that can be done in the worst case.
8.4
Prioritized sweeping was developed simultaneously and independently by Moore
and Atkeson (1993) and Peng and Williams (1993). The results in the box on
page 170 are due to Peng and Williams (1993). The results in the box on page 171
are due to Moore and Atkeson. Key subsequent work in this area includes that
by McMahan and Gordon (2005) and by van Seijen and Sutton (2013).
8.5
This section was strongly inﬂuenced by the experiments of Singh (1993).
8.6–7
Trajectory sampling has implicitly been a part of reinforcement learning from
the outset, but it was most explicitly emphasized by Barto, Bradtke, and Singh
(1995) in their introduction of RTDP. They recognized that Korf’s (1990) learning


--- Page 215 ---

8.13. Summary of Part I: Dimensions
193
real-time A* (LRTA*) algorithm is an asynchronous DP algorithm that applies
to stochastic problems as well as the deterministic problems on which Korf
focused. Beyond LRTA*, RTDP includes the option of updating the values of
many states in the time intervals between the execution of actions. Barto et
al. (1995) proved the convergence result described here by combining Korf’s (1990)
convergence proof for LRTA* with the result of Bertsekas (1982) (also Bertsekas
and Tsitsiklis, 1989) ensuring convergence of asynchronous DP for stochastic
shortest path problems in the undiscounted case. Combining model-learning
with RTDP is called Adaptive RTDP, also presented by Barto et al. (1995) and
discussed by Barto (2011).
8.9
For further reading on heuristic search, the reader is encouraged to consult texts
and surveys such as those by Russell and Norvig (2009) and Korf (1988). Peng
and Williams (1993) explored a forward focusing of updates much as is suggested
in this section.
8.10
Abramson’s (1990) expected-outcome model is a rollout algorithm applied to two-
person games in which the play of both simulated players is random. He argued
that even with random play, it is a “powerful heuristic” that is “precise, accurate,
easily estimable, eﬃciently calculable, and domain-independent.” Tesauro and
Galperin (1997) demonstrated the e↵ectiveness of rollout algorithms for improving
the play of backgammon programs, adopting the term “rollout” from its use
in evaluating backgammon positions by playing out positions with di↵erent
randomly generating sequences of dice rolls. Bertsekas, Tsitsiklis, and Wu (1997)
examine rollout algorithms applied to combinatorial optimization problems, and
Bertsekas (2013) surveys their use in discrete deterministic optimization problems,
remarking that they are “often surprisingly e↵ective.”
8.11
The central ideas of MCTS were introduced by Coulom (2006) and by Kocsis
and Szepesv´ari (2006). They built upon previous research with Monte Carlo
planning algorithms as reviewed by these authors. Browne, Powley, Whitehouse,
Lucas, Cowling, Rohlfshagen, Tavener, Perez, Samothrakis, and Colton (2012)
is an excellent survey of MCTS methods and their applications. David Silver
contributed to the ideas and presentation in this section.

