============================================================
 Chapter 16 - Applications and Case Studies
 (PDF pages 443-480)
============================================================

--- Page 443 ---

Chapter 16
Applications and Case Studies
In this chapter we present a few case studies of reinforcement learning. Several of these
are substantial applications of potential economic signiﬁcance. One, Samuel’s checkers
player, is primarily of historical interest. Our presentations are intended to illustrate some
of the trade-o↵s and issues that arise in real applications. For example, we emphasize how
domain knowledge is incorporated into the formulation and solution of the problem. We
also highlight the representation issues that are so often critical to successful applications.
The algorithms used in some of these case studies are substantially more complex than
those we have presented in the rest of the book. Applications of reinforcement learning
are still far from routine and typically require as much art as science. Making applications
easier and more straightforward is one of the goals of current research in reinforcement
learning.
16.1
TD-Gammon
One of the most impressive applications of reinforcement learning to date is that by
Gerald Tesauro to the game of backgammon (Tesauro, 1992, 1994, 1995, 2002). Tesauro’s
program, TD-Gammon, required little backgammon knowledge, yet learned to play
extremely well, near the level of the world’s strongest grandmasters.
The learning
algorithm in TD-Gammon was a straightforward combination of the TD(λ) algorithm
and nonlinear function approximation using a multilayer artiﬁcial neural network (ANN)
trained by backpropagating TD errors.
Backgammon is a major game in the sense that it is played throughout the world,
with numerous tournaments and regular world championship matches. It is in part a
game of chance, and it is a popular vehicle for waging signiﬁcant sums of money. There
are probably more professional backgammon players than there are professional chess
players. The game is played with 15 white and 15 black pieces on a board of 24 locations,
called points. To the right on the next page is shown a typical position early in the game,
seen from the perspective of the white player. White here has just rolled the dice and
obtained a 5 and a 2. This means that he can move one of his pieces 5 steps and one


--- Page 444 ---

422
Chapter 16: Applications and Case Studies
white pieces move 
   counterclockwise
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11 12
18
17 16
15 14
13
19
20
21
22
23
24
    black pieces 
move clockwise
A backgammon position
(possibly the same piece) 2 steps. For
example, he could move two pieces from
the 12 point, one to the 17 point, and
one to the 14 point. White’s objective is
to advance all of his pieces into the last
quadrant (points 19–24) and then o↵
the board. The ﬁrst player to remove
all his pieces wins. One complication
is that the pieces interact as they pass
each other going in di↵erent directions.
For example, if it were black’s move, he
could use the dice roll of 2 to move a
piece from the 24 point to the 22 point,
“hitting” the white piece there. Pieces that have been hit are placed on the “bar” in the
middle of the board (where we already see one previously hit black piece), from whence
they reenter the race from the start. However, if there are two pieces on a point, then
the opponent cannot move to that point; the pieces are protected from being hit. Thus,
white cannot use his 5–2 dice roll to move either of his pieces on the 1 point, because
their possible resulting points are occupied by groups of black pieces. Forming contiguous
blocks of occupied points to block the opponent is one of the elementary strategies of the
game.
Backgammon involves several further complications, but the above description gives
the basic idea. With 30 pieces and 24 possible locations (26, counting the bar and
o↵-the-board) it should be clear that the number of possible backgammon positions is
enormous, far more than the number of memory elements one could have in any physically
realizable computer. The number of moves possible from each position is also large. For a
typical dice roll there might be 20 di↵erent ways of playing. In considering future moves,
such as the response of the opponent, one must consider the possible dice rolls as well.
The result is that the game tree has an e↵ective branching factor of about 400. This is
far too large to permit e↵ective use of the conventional heuristic search methods that
have proved so e↵ective in games like chess and checkers.
On the other hand, the game is a good match to the capabilities of TD learning
methods. Although the game is highly stochastic, a complete description of the game’s
state is available at all times. The game evolves over a sequence of moves and positions
until ﬁnally ending in a win for one player or the other, ending the game. The outcome
can be interpreted as a ﬁnal reward to be predicted. On the other hand, the theoretical
results we have described so far cannot be usefully applied to this task. The number of
states is so large that a lookup table cannot be used, and the opponent is a source of
uncertainty and time variation.
TD-Gammon used a nonlinear form of TD(λ). The estimated value, ˆv(s,w), of any
state (board position) s was meant to estimate the probability of winning starting from
state s. To achieve this, rewards were deﬁned as zero for all time steps except those
on which the game is won. To implement the value function, TD-Gammon used a
standard multilayer ANN, much like that shown to the right on the next page. (The real


--- Page 445 ---

16.1. TD-Gammon
423
Vt+1! Vt
hidden unit
backgammon position (198 input units)
predicted probability
of winning, Vt
TD error,
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
ˆv(St+1,w) −ˆv(St,w)
TD error
ˆv(St,w)
hidden units
(40-80)
Figure 16.1: The TD-Gammon ANN
network had two additional units in its
ﬁnal layer to estimate the probability of
each player’s winning in a special way
called a “gammon” or “backgammon.”)
The network consisted of a layer of input
units, a layer of hidden units, and a ﬁnal
output unit. The input to the network
was a representation of a backgammon
position, and the output was an estimate
of the value of that position.
In the ﬁrst version of TD-Gammon,
TD-Gammon 0.0, backgammon posi-
tions were represented to the network
in a relatively direct way that involved
little backgammon knowledge. It did,
however, involve substantial knowledge of how ANNs work and how information is best
presented to them. It is instructive to note the exact representation Tesauro chose. There
were a total of 198 input units to the network. For each point on the backgammon board,
four units indicated the number of white pieces on the point. If there were no white
pieces, then all four units took on the value zero. If there was one piece, then the ﬁrst
unit took on the value 1. This encoded the elementary concept of a “blot,” i.e., a piece
that can be hit by the opponent. If there were two or more pieces, then the second unit
was set to 1. This encoded the basic concept of a “made point” on which the opponent
cannot land. If there were exactly three pieces on the point, then the third unit was set
to 1. This encoded the basic concept of a “single spare,” i.e., an extra piece in addition
to the two pieces that made the point. Finally, if there were more than three pieces, the
fourth unit was set to a value proportionate to the number of additional pieces beyond
three. Letting n denote the total number of pieces on the point, if n > 3, then the fourth
unit took on the value (n−3)/2. This encoded a linear representation of “multiple spares”
at the given point.
With four units for white and four for black at each of the 24 points, that made a
total of 192 units. Two additional units encoded the number of white and black pieces on
the bar (each took the value n/2, where n is the number of pieces on the bar), and two
more encoded the number of black and white pieces already successfully removed from
the board (these took the value n/15, where n is the number of pieces already borne
o↵). Finally, two units indicated in a binary fashion whether it was white’s or black’s
turn to move. The general logic behind these choices should be clear. Basically, Tesauro
tried to represent the position in a straightforward way, while keeping the number of
units relatively small. He provided one unit for each conceptually distinct possibility that
seemed likely to be relevant, and he scaled them to roughly the same range, in this case
between 0 and 1.
Given a representation of a backgammon position, the network computed its estimated
value in the standard way. Corresponding to each connection from an input unit to a
hidden unit was a real-valued weight. Signals from each input unit were multiplied by


--- Page 446 ---

424
Chapter 16: Applications and Case Studies
their corresponding weights and summed at the hidden unit. The output, h(j), of hidden
unit j was a nonlinear sigmoid function of the weighted sum:
h(j) = σ
 X
i
wijxi
!
=
1
1 + e−P
i wijxi ,
where xi is the value of the ith input unit and wij is the weight of its connection to the
jth hidden unit (all the weights in the network together make up the parameter vector w).
The output of the sigmoid is always between 0 and 1, and has a natural interpretation as
a probability based on a summation of evidence. The computation from hidden units
to the output unit was entirely analogous. Each connection from a hidden unit to the
output unit had a separate weight. The output unit formed the weighted sum and then
passed it through the same sigmoid nonlinearity.
TD-Gammon used the semi-gradient form of the TD(λ) algorithm described in Sec-
tion 12.2, with the gradients computed by the error backpropagation algorithm (Rumel-
hart, Hinton, and Williams, 1986). Recall that the general update rule for this case is
wt+1 .= wt + ↵
h
Rt+1 + γˆv(St+1,wt) −ˆv(St,wt)
i
zt,
(16.1)
where wt is the vector of all modiﬁable parameters (in this case, the weights of the
network) and zt is a vector of eligibility traces, one for each component of wt, updated by
zt .= γλzt−1 + rˆv(St,wt),
with z0 .= 0. The gradient in this equation can be computed eﬃciently by the backpropa-
gation procedure. For the backgammon application, in which γ = 1 and the reward is
always zero except upon winning, the TD error portion of the learning rule is usually
just ˆv(St+1,w) −ˆv(St,w), as suggested in Figure 16.1.
To apply the learning rule we need a source of backgammon games. Tesauro obtained
an unending sequence of games by playing his learning backgammon player against itself.
To choose its moves, TD-Gammon considered each of the 20 or so ways it could play
its dice roll and the corresponding positions that would result. The resulting positions
are afterstates as discussed in Section 6.8. The network was consulted to estimate each
of their values. The move was then selected that would lead to the position with the
highest estimated value. Continuing in this way, with TD-Gammon making the moves
for both sides, it was possible to easily generate large numbers of backgammon games.
Each game was treated as an episode, with the sequence of positions acting as the states,
S0, S1, S2, . . .. Tesauro applied the nonlinear TD rule (16.1) fully incrementally, that is,
after each individual move.
The weights of the network were set initially to small random values. The initial
evaluations were thus entirely arbitrary. Because the moves were selected on the basis
of these evaluations, the initial moves were inevitably poor, and the initial games often
lasted hundreds or thousands of moves before one side or the other won, almost by
accident. After a few dozen games however, performance improved rapidly.
After playing about 300,000 games against itself, TD-Gammon 0.0 as described above
learned to play approximately as well as the best previous backgammon computer


--- Page 447 ---

16.1. TD-Gammon
425
programs. This was a striking result because all the previous high-performance computer
programs had used extensive backgammon knowledge. For example, the reigning champion
program at the time was, arguably, Neurogammon, another program written by Tesauro
that used an ANN but not TD learning. Neurogammon’s network was trained on a
large training corpus of exemplary moves provided by backgammon experts, and, in
addition, started with a set of features specially crafted for backgammon. Neurogammon
was a highly tuned, highly e↵ective backgammon program that decisively won the
World Backgammon Olympiad in 1989.
TD-Gammon 0.0, on the other hand, was
constructed with essentially zero backgammon knowledge. That it was able to do as
well as Neurogammon and all other approaches is striking testimony to the potential of
self-play learning methods.
The tournament success of TD-Gammon 0.0 with zero expert backgammon knowledge
suggested an obvious modiﬁcation: add the specialized backgammon features but keep
the self-play TD learning method. This produced TD-Gammon 1.0. TD-Gammon 1.0 was
clearly substantially better than all previous backgammon programs and found serious
competition only among human experts. Later versions of the program, TD-Gammon 2.0
(40 hidden units) and TD-Gammon 2.1 (80 hidden units), were augmented with a selective
two-ply search procedure. To select moves, these programs looked ahead not just to the
positions that would immediately result, but also to the opponent’s possible dice rolls
and moves. Assuming the opponent always took the move that appeared immediately
best for him, the expected value of each candidate move was computed and the best
was selected. To save computer time, the second ply of search was conducted only for
candidate moves that were ranked highly after the ﬁrst ply, about four or ﬁve moves on
average. Two-ply search a↵ected only the moves selected; the learning process proceeded
exactly as before. The ﬁnal versions of the program, TD-Gammon 3.0 and 3.1, used 160
hidden units and a selective three-ply search. TD-Gammon illustrates the combination
of learned value functions and decision-time search as in heuristic search and MCTS
methods. In follow-on work, Tesauro and Galperin (1997) explored trajectory sampling
methods as an alternative to full-width search, which reduced the error rate of live play
by large numerical factors (4x–6x) while keeping the think time reasonable at ⇠5–10
seconds per move.
During the 1990s, Tesauro was able to play his programs in a signiﬁcant number of
games against world-class human players. A summary of the results is given in Table 16.1.
Program
Hidden
Training
Opponents
Results
Units
Games
TD-Gammon 0.0
40
300,000
other programs
tied for best
TD-Gammon 1.0
80
300,000
Robertie, Magriel, ...
−13 pts / 51 games
TD-Gammon 2.0
40
800,000
various Grandmasters
−7 pts / 38 games
TD-Gammon 2.1
80
1,500,000
Robertie
−1 pt / 40 games
TD-Gammon 3.0
80
1,500,000
Kazaros
+6 pts / 20 games
Table 16.1: Summary of TD-Gammon Results


--- Page 448 ---

426
Chapter 16: Applications and Case Studies
Based on these results and analyses by backgammon grandmasters (Robertie, 1992; see
Tesauro, 1995), TD-Gammon 3.0 appeared to play at close to, or possibly better than,
the playing strength of the best human players in the world. Tesauro reported in a
subsequent article (Tesauro, 2002) the results of an extensive rollout analysis of the move
decisions and doubling decisions of TD-Gammon relative to top human players. The
conclusion was that TD-Gammon 3.1 had a “lopsided advantage” in piece-movement
decisions, and a “slight edge” in doubling decisions, over top humans.
TD-Gammon had a signiﬁcant impact on the way the best human players play the
game. For example, it learned to play certain opening positions di↵erently than was
the convention among the best human players. Based on TD-Gammon’s success and
further analysis, the best human players now play these positions as TD-Gammon does
(Tesauro, 1995). The impact on human play was greatly accelerated when several other
self-teaching ANN backgammon programs inspired by TD-Gammon, such as Jellyﬁsh,
Snowie, and GNUBackgammon, became widely available. These programs enabled wide
dissemination of new knowledge generated by the ANNs, resulting in great improvements
in the overall caliber of human tournament play (Tesauro, 2002).
16.2
Samuel’s Checkers Player
An important precursor to Tesauro’s TD-Gammon was the seminal work of Arthur Samuel
(1959, 1967) in constructing programs for learning to play checkers. Samuel was one of
the ﬁrst to make e↵ective use of heuristic search methods and of what we would now call
temporal-di↵erence learning. His checkers players are instructive case studies in addition
to being of historical interest. We emphasize the relationship of Samuel’s methods to
modern reinforcement learning methods and try to convey some of Samuel’s motivation
for using them.
Samuel ﬁrst wrote a checkers-playing program for the IBM 701 in 1952. His ﬁrst
learning program was completed in 1955 and was demonstrated on television in 1956.
Later versions of the program achieved good, though not expert, playing skill. Samuel
was attracted to game-playing as a domain for studying machine learning because games
are less complicated than problems “taken from life” while still allowing fruitful study of
how heuristic procedures and learning can be used together. He chose to study checkers
instead of chess because its relative simplicity made it possible to focus more strongly on
learning.
Samuel’s programs played by performing a lookahead search from each current position.
They used what we now call heuristic search methods to determine how to expand the
search tree and when to stop searching. The terminal board positions of each search were
evaluated, or “scored,” by a value function, or “scoring polynomial,” using linear function
approximation. In this and other respects Samuel’s work seems to have been inspired
by the suggestions of Shannon (1950). In particular, Samuel’s program was based on
Shannon’s minimax procedure to ﬁnd the best move from the current position. Working
backward through the search tree from the scored terminal positions, each position was
given the score of the position that would result from the best move, assuming that the
machine would always try to maximize the score, while the opponent would always try to


--- Page 449 ---

16.2. Samuel’s Checkers Player
427
minimize it. Samuel called this the “backed-up score” of the position. When the minimax
procedure reached the search tree’s root—the current position—it yielded the best move
under the assumption that the opponent would be using the same evaluation criterion,
shifted to its point of view. Some versions of Samuel’s programs used sophisticated search
control methods analogous to what are known as “alpha-beta” cuto↵s (e.g., see Pearl,
1984).
Samuel used two main learning methods, the simplest of which he called rote learning.
It consisted simply of saving a description of each board position encountered during play
together with its backed-up value determined by the minimax procedure. The result was
that if a position that had already been encountered were to occur again as a terminal
position of a search tree, the depth of the search was e↵ectively ampliﬁed because this
position’s stored value cached the results of one or more searches conducted earlier. One
initial problem was that the program was not encouraged to move along the most direct
path to a win. Samuel gave it a “a sense of direction” by decreasing a position’s value
a small amount each time it was backed up a level (called a ply) during the minimax
analysis. “If the program is now faced with a choice of board positions whose scores
di↵er only by the ply number, it will automatically make the most advantageous choice,
choosing a low-ply alternative if winning and a high-ply alternative if losing” (Samuel,
1959, p. 80). Samuel found this discounting-like technique essential to successful learning.
Rote learning produced slow but continual improvement that was most e↵ective for
opening and endgame play. His program became a “better-than-average novice” after
learning from many games against itself, a variety of human opponents, and from book
games in a supervised learning mode.
Rote learning and other aspects of Samuel’s work strongly suggest the essential idea
of temporal-di↵erence learning—that the value of a state should equal the value of
likely following states. Samuel came closest to this idea in his second learning method,
his “learning by generalization” procedure for modifying the parameters of the value
function. Samuel’s method was the same in concept as that used much later by Tesauro
in TD-Gammon. He played his program many games against another version of itself and
performed an update after each move. The idea of Samuel’s update is suggested by the
backup diagram in Figure 16.2. Each open circle represents a position where the program
moves next, an on-move position, and each solid circle represents a position where the
opponent moves next. An update was made to the value of each on-move position after a
move by each side, resulting in a second on-move position. The update was toward the
minimax value of a search launched from the second on-move position. Thus, the overall
e↵ect was that of a backing-up over one full move of real events and then a search over
possible events, as suggested by Figure 16.2. Samuel’s actual algorithm was signiﬁcantly
more complex than this for computational reasons, but this was the basic idea.
Samuel did not include explicit rewards. Instead, he ﬁxed the weight of the most
important feature, the piece advantage feature, which measured the number of pieces
the program had relative to how many its opponent had, giving higher weight to kings,
and including reﬁnements so that it was better to trade pieces when winning than when
losing. Thus, the goal of Samuel’s program was to improve its piece advantage, which in
checkers is highly correlated with winning.


--- Page 450 ---

428
Chapter 16: Applications and Case Studies
hypothetical events
actual events
backup
Figure 16.2: The backup diagram for Samuel’s checkers player.
However, Samuel’s learning method may have been missing an essential part of a sound
temporal-di↵erence algorithm. Temporal-di↵erence learning can be viewed as a way of
making a value function consistent with itself, and this we can clearly see in Samuel’s
method. But also needed is a way of tying the value function to the true value of the
states. We have enforced this via rewards and by discounting or giving a ﬁxed value to
the terminal state. But Samuel’s method included no rewards and no special treatment of
the terminal positions of games. As Samuel himself pointed out, his value function could
have become consistent merely by giving a constant value to all positions. He hoped to
discourage such solutions by giving his piece-advantage term a large, nonmodiﬁable weight.
But although this may decrease the likelihood of ﬁnding useless evaluation functions,
it does not prohibit them. For example, a constant function could still be attained by
setting the modiﬁable weights so as to cancel the e↵ect of the nonmodiﬁable one.
Because Samuel’s learning procedure was not constrained to ﬁnd useful evaluation
functions, it should have been possible for it to become worse with experience. In fact,
Samuel reported observing this during extensive self-play training sessions. To get the
program improving again, Samuel had to intervene and set the weight with the largest
absolute value back to zero. His interpretation was that this drastic intervention jarred
the program out of local optima, but another possibility is that it jarred the program out
of evaluation functions that were consistent but had little to do with winning or losing
the game.
Despite these potential problems, Samuel’s checkers player using the generalization
learning method approached “better-than-average” play. Fairly good amateur opponents
characterized it as “tricky but beatable” (Samuel, 1959). In contrast to the rote-learning
version, this version was able to develop a good middle game but remained weak in
opening and endgame play. This program also included an ability to search through sets of
features to ﬁnd those that were most useful in forming the value function. A later version
(Samuel, 1967) included reﬁnements in its search procedure, such as alpha-beta pruning,


--- Page 451 ---

16.3. Watson’s Daily-Double Wagering
429
extensive use of a supervised learning mode called “book learning,” and hierarchical
lookup tables called signature tables (Griﬃth, 1966) to represent the value function
instead of linear function approximation. This version learned to play much better than
the 1959 program, though still not at a master level. Samuel’s checkers-playing program
was widely recognized as a signiﬁcant achievement in artiﬁcial intelligence and machine
learning.
16.3
Watson’s Daily-Double Wagering
IBM Watson1 is the system developed by a team of IBM researchers to play the popular
TV quiz show Jeopardy!.2 It gained fame in 2011 by winning ﬁrst prize in an exhibition
match against human champions. Although the main technical achievement demonstrated
by Watson was its ability to quickly and accurately answer natural language questions
over broad areas of general knowledge, its winning Jeopardy! performance also relied on
sophisticated decision-making strategies for critical parts of the game. Tesauro, Gondek,
Lechner, Fan, and Prager (2012, 2013) adapted Tesauro’s TD-Gammon system described
above to create the strategy used by Watson in “Daily-Double” (DD) wagering in its
celebrated winning performance against human champions. These authors report that the
e↵ectiveness of this wagering strategy went well beyond what human players are able to
do in live game play, and that it, along with other advanced strategies, was an important
contributor to Watson’s impressive winning performance. Here we focus only on DD
wagering because it is the component of Watson that owes the most to reinforcement
learning.
Jeopardy! is played by three contestants who face a board showing 30 squares, each of
which hides a clue and has a dollar value. The squares are arranged in six columns, each
corresponding to a di↵erent category. A contestant selects a square, the host reads the
square’s clue, and each contestant may choose to respond to the clue by sounding a buzzer
(“buzzing in”). The ﬁrst contestant to buzz in gets to try responding to the clue. If this
contestant’s response is correct, their score increases by the dollar value of the square; if
their response is not correct, or if they do not respond within ﬁve seconds, their score
decreases by that amount, and the other contestants get a chance to buzz in to respond
to the same clue. One or two squares (depending on the game’s current round) are
special DD squares. A contestant who selects one of these gets an exclusive opportunity
to respond to the square’s clue and has to decide—before the clue is revealed—on how
much to wager, or bet. The bet has to be greater than ﬁve dollars but not greater than
the contestant’s current score. If the contestant responds correctly to the DD clue, their
score increases by the bet amount; otherwise it decreases by the bet amount. At the end
of each game is a “Final Jeopardy” (FJ) round in which each contestant writes down
a sealed bet and then writes an answer after the clue is read. The contestant with the
highest score after three rounds of play (where a round consists of revealing all 30 clues)
is the winner. The game has many other details, but these are enough to appreciate
1Registered trademark of IBM Corp.
2Registered trademark of Jeopardy Productions Inc.


--- Page 452 ---

430
Chapter 16: Applications and Case Studies
the importance of DD wagering. Winning or losing often depends on a contestant’s DD
wagering strategy.
Whenever Watson selected a DD square, it chose its bet by comparing action values,
ˆq(s, bet), that estimated the probability of a win from the current game state, s, for
each round-dollar legal bet. Except for some risk-abatement measures described below,
Watson selected the bet with the maximum action value. Action values were computed
whenever a betting decision was needed by using two types of estimates that were learned
before any live game play took place. The ﬁrst were estimated values of the afterstates
(Section 6.8) that would result from selecting each legal bet. These estimates were obtained
from a state-value function, ˆv(·,w), deﬁned by parameters w, that gave estimates of the
probability of a win for Watson from any game state. The second estimates used to
compute action values gave the “in-category DD conﬁdence,” pDD, which estimated the
likelihood that Watson would respond correctly to the as-yet unrevealed DD clue.
Tesauro et al. used the reinforcement learning approach of TD-Gammon described above
to learn ˆv(·,w): a straightforward combination of nonlinear TD(λ) using a multilayer
ANN with weights w trained by backpropagating TD errors during many simulated
games. States were represented to the network by feature vectors speciﬁcally designed
for Jeopardy!. Features included the current scores of the three players, how many DDs
remained, the total dollar value of the remaining clues, and other information related to
the amount of play left in the game. Unlike TD-Gammon, which learned by self-play,
Watson’s ˆv was learned over millions of simulated games against carefully-crafted models
of human players. In-category conﬁdence estimates were conditioned on the number of
right responses r and wrong responses w that Watson gave in previously-played clues in
the current category. The dependencies on (r, w) were estimated from Watson’s actual
accuracies over many thousands of historical categories.
With the previously learned value function ˆv and in-category DD conﬁdence pDD,
Watson computed ˆq(s, bet) for each legal round-dollar bet as follows:
ˆq(s, bet) = pDD ⇥ˆv(SW + bet,. . .) + (1 −pDD) ⇥ˆv(SW −bet,. . .),
(16.2)
where SW is Watson’s current score, and ˆv gives the estimated value for the game state
after Watson’s response to the DD clue, which is either correct or incorrect. Computing
an action value this way corresponds to the insight from Exercise 3.19 that an action
value is the expected next state value given the action (except that here it is the expected
next afterstate value because the full next state of the entire game depends on the next
square selection).
Tesauro et al. found that selecting bets by maximizing action values incurred “a
frightening amount of risk,” meaning that if Watson’s response to the clue happened to
be wrong, the loss could be disastrous for its chances of winning. To decrease the downside
risk of a wrong answer, Tesauro et al. adjusted (16.2) by subtracting a small fraction of
the standard deviation over Watson’s correct/incorrect afterstate evaluations. They
further reduced risk by prohibiting bets that would cause the wrong-answer afterstate
value to decrease below a certain limit. These measures slightly reduced Watson’s
expectation of winning, but they signiﬁcantly reduced downside risk, not only in terms of
average risk per DD bet, but even more so in extreme-risk scenarios where a risk-neutral
Watson would bet most or all of its bankroll.


--- Page 453 ---

16.3. Watson’s Daily-Double Wagering
431
Why was the TD-Gammon method of self-play not used to learn the critical value
function ˆv? Learning from self-play in Jeopardy! would not have worked very well
because Watson was so di↵erent from any human contestant. Self-play would have led to
exploration of state space regions that are not typical for play against human opponents,
particularly human champions. In addition, unlike backgammon, Jeopardy! is a game
of imperfect information because contestants do not have access to all the information
inﬂuencing their opponents’ play. In particular, Jeopardy! contestants do not know how
much conﬁdence their opponents have for responding to clues in the various categories.
Self-play would have been something like playing poker with someone who is holding the
same cards that you hold.
As a result of these complications, much of the e↵ort in developing Watson’s DD-
wagering strategy was devoted to creating good models of human opponents. The models
did not address the natural language aspect of the game, but were instead stochastic
process models of events that can occur during play. Statistics were extracted from an
extensive fan-created archive of game information from the beginning of the show to the
present day. The archive includes information such as the ordering of the clues, right and
wrong contestant answers, DD locations, and DD and FJ bets for nearly 300,000 clues.
Three models were constructed: an Average Contestant model (based on all the data), a
Champion model (based on statistics from games with the 100 best players), and a Grand
Champion model (based on statistics from games with the 10 best players). In addition
to serving as opponents during learning, the models were used to assess the beneﬁts
produced by the learned DD-wagering strategy. Watson’s win rate in simulation when it
used a baseline heuristic DD-wagering strategy was 61%; when it used the learned values
and a default conﬁdence value, its win rate increased to 64%; and with live in-category
conﬁdence, it was 67%. Tesauro et al. regarded this as a signiﬁcant improvement, given
that the DD wagering was needed only about 1.5 to 2 times in each game.
Because Watson had only a few seconds to bet, as well as to select squares and decide
whether or not to buzz in, the computation time needed to make these decisions was
a critical factor. The ANN implementation of ˆv allowed DD bets to be made quickly
enough to meet the time constraints of live play. However, once games could be simulated
fast enough through improvements in the simulation software, near the end of a game
it was feasible to estimate the value of bets by averaging over many Monte-Carlo trials
in which the consequence of each bet was determined by simulating play to the game’s
end. Selecting endgame DD bets in live play based on Monte-Carlo trials instead of the
ANN signiﬁcantly improved Watson’s performance because errors in value estimates
in endgames could seriously a↵ect its chances of winning. Making all the decisions via
Monte-Carlo trials might have led to better wagering decisions, but this was simply
impossible given the complexity of the game and the time constraints of live play.
Although its ability to quickly and accurately answer natural language questions
stands out as Watson’s major achievement, all of its sophisticated decision strategies
contributed to its impressive defeat of human champions. According to Tesauro et al.
(2012):
... it is plainly evident that our strategy algorithms achieve a level of quanti-
tative precision and real-time performance that exceeds human capabilities.


--- Page 454 ---

432
Chapter 16: Applications and Case Studies
This is particularly true in the cases of DD wagering and endgame buzzing,
where humans simply cannot come close to matching the precise equity and
conﬁdence estimates and complex decision calculations performed by Watson.
16.4
Optimizing Memory Control
Most computers use dynamic random access memory (DRAM) as their main memory
because of its low cost and high capacity. The job of a DRAM memory controller is to
eﬃciently use the interface between the processor chip and an o↵-chip DRAM system
to provide the high-bandwidth and low-latency data transfer necessary for high-speed
program execution.
A memory controller needs to deal with dynamically changing
patterns of read/write requests while adhering to a large number of timing and resource
constraints required by the hardware. This is a formidable scheduling problem, especially
with modern processors with multiple cores sharing the same DRAM.
˙Ipek, Mutlu, Mart´ınez, and Caruana (2008) (also Mart´ınez and ˙Ipek, 2009) designed
a reinforcement learning memory controller and demonstrated that it can signiﬁcantly
improve the speed of program execution over what was possible with conventional
controllers at the time of their research. They were motivated by limitations of existing
state-of-the-art controllers that used policies that did not take advantage of past scheduling
experience and did not account for long-term consequences of scheduling decisions. ˙Ipek
et al.’s project was carried out by means of simulation, but they designed the controller
at the detailed level of the hardware needed to implement it—including the learning
algorithm—directly on a processor chip.
Accessing DRAM involves a number of steps that have to be done according to strict
time constraints. DRAM systems consist of multiple DRAM chips, each containing
multiple rectangular arrays of storage cells arranged in rows and columns. Each cell
stores a bit as the charge on a capacitor. Because the charge decreases over time, each
DRAM cell needs to be recharged—refreshed—every few milliseconds to prevent memory
content from being lost. This need to refresh the cells is why DRAM is called “dynamic.”
Each cell array has a row bu↵er that holds a row of bits that can be transferred into
or out of one of the array’s rows. An activate command “opens a row,” which means
moving the contents of the row whose address is indicated by the command into the
row bu↵er. With a row open, the controller can issue read and write commands to the
cell array. Each read command transfers a word (a short sequence of consecutive bits)
in the row bu↵er to the external data bus, and each write command transfers a word
in the external data bus to the row bu↵er. Before a di↵erent row can be opened, a
precharge command must be issued which transfers the (possibly updated) data in the
row bu↵er back into the addressed row of the cell array. After this, another activate
command can open a new row to be accessed. Read and write commands are column
commands because they sequentially transfer bits into or out of columns of the row bu↵er;
multiple bits can be transferred without re-opening the row. Read and write commands
to the currently-open row can be carried out more quickly than accessing a di↵erent row,
which would involve additional row commands: precharge and activate; this is sometimes


--- Page 455 ---

16.4. Optimizing Memory Control
433
referred to as “row locality.” A memory controller maintains a memory transaction queue
that stores memory-access requests from the processors sharing the memory system. The
controller has to process requests by issuing commands to the memory system while
adhering to a large number of timing constraints.
A controller’s policy for scheduling access requests can have a large e↵ect on the
performance of the memory system, such as the average latency with which requests
can be satisﬁed and the throughput the system is capable of achieving. The simplest
scheduling strategy handles access requests in the order in which they arrive by issuing
all the commands required by the request before beginning to service the next one. But if
the system is not ready for one of these commands, or executing a command would result
in resources being underutilized (e.g., due to timing constraints arising from servicing
that one command), it makes sense to begin servicing a newer request before ﬁnishing
the older one. Policies can gain eﬃciency by reordering requests, for example, by giving
priority to read requests over write requests, or by giving priority to read/write commands
to already open rows. The policy called First-Ready, First-Come-First-Serve (FR-FCFS),
gives priority to column commands (read and write) over row commands (activate and
precharge), and in case of a tie gives priority to the oldest command. FR-FCFS was
shown to outperform other scheduling policies in terms of average memory-access latency
under conditions commonly encountered (Rixner, 2004).
Figure 16.3 is a high-level view of ˙Ipek et al.’s reinforcement learning memory controller.
They modeled the DRAM access process as an MDP whose states are the contents of the
transaction queue and whose actions are commands to the DRAM system: precharge,
activate, read, write, and NoOp. The reward signal is 1 whenever the action is read or
write, and otherwise it is 0. State transitions were considered to be stochastic because
the next state of the system not only depends on the scheduler’s command, but also on
aspects of the system’s behavior that the scheduler cannot control, such as the workloads
of the processor cores accessing the DRAM system.
Figure 16.3: High-level view of the reinforcement learning DRAM controller. The scheduler is
the reinforcement learning agent. Its environment is represented by features of the transaction
queue, and its actions are commands to the DRAM system. ©2009 IEEE. Reprinted, with
permission, from J. F. Mart´ınez and E. ˙Ipek, Dynamic multicore resource management: A
machine learning approach, Micro, IEEE, 29(5), p. 12.


--- Page 456 ---

434
Chapter 16: Applications and Case Studies
Critical to this MDP are constraints on the actions available in each state. Recall from
Chapter 3 that the set of available actions can depend on the state: At 2 A(St), where
At is the action at time step t and A(St) is the set of actions available in state St. In
this application, the integrity of the DRAM system was assured by not allowing actions
that would violate timing or resource constraints. Although ˙Ipek et al. did not make it
explicit, they e↵ectively accomplished this by pre-deﬁning the sets A(St) for all possible
states St.
These constraints explain why the MDP has a NoOp action and why the reward signal
is 0 except when a read or write command is issued. NoOp is issued when it is the sole
legal action in a state. To maximize utilization of the memory system, the controller’s
task is to drive the system to states in which either a read or a write action can be
selected: only these actions result in sending data over the external data bus, so it is only
these that contribute to the throughput of the system. Although precharge and activate
produce no immediate reward, the agent needs to select these actions to make it possible
to later select the rewarded read and write actions.
The scheduling agent used Sarsa (Section 6.4) to learn an action-value function. States
were represented by six integer-valued features. To approximate the action-value function,
the algorithm used linear function approximation implemented by tile coding with hashing
(Section 9.5.4). The tile coding had 32 tilings, each storing 256 action values as 16-bit
ﬁxed point numbers. Exploration was "-greedy with " = 0.05.
State features included the number of read requests in the transaction queue, the
number of write requests in the transaction queue, the number of write requests in the
transaction queue waiting for their row to be opened, and the number of read requests in
the transaction queue waiting for their row to be opened that are the oldest issued by
their requesting processors. (The other features depended on how the DRAM interacts
with cache memory, details we omit here.) The selection of the state features was based
on ˙Ipek et al.’s understanding of factors that impact DRAM performance. For example,
balancing the rate of servicing reads and writes based on how many of each are in the
transaction queue can help avoid stalling the DRAM system’s interaction with cache
memory. The authors in fact generated a relatively long list of potential features, and
then pared them down to a handful using simulations guided by stepwise feature selection.
An interesting aspect of this formulation of the scheduling problem as an MDP is
that the features input to the tile coding for deﬁning the action-value function were
di↵erent from the features used to specify the action-constraint sets A(St). Whereas the
tile coding input was derived from the contents of the transaction queue, the constraint
sets depended on a host of other features related to timing and resource constraints that
had to be satisﬁed by the hardware implementation of the entire system. In this way, the
action constraints ensured that the learning algorithm’s exploration could not endanger
the integrity of the physical system, while learning was e↵ectively limited to a “safe”
region of the much larger state space of the hardware implementation.
Because an objective of this work was that the learning controller could be implemented
on a chip so that learning could occur online while a computer is running, hardware
implementation details were important considerations. The design included two ﬁve-stage
pipelines to calculate and compare two action values at every processor clock cycle, and


--- Page 457 ---

16.4. Optimizing Memory Control
435
to update the appropriate action value. This included accessing the tile coding which
was stored on-chip in static RAM. For the conﬁguration ˙Ipek et al. simulated, which was
a 4GHz 4-core chip typical of high-end workstations at the time of their research, there
were 10 processor cycles for every DRAM cycle. Considering the cycles needed to ﬁll
the pipes, up to 12 actions could be evaluated in each DRAM cycle. ˙Ipek et al. found
that the number of legal commands for any state was rarely greater than this, and that
performance loss was negligible if enough time was not always available to consider all
legal commands. These and other clever design details made it feasible to implement the
complete controller and learning algorithm on a multi-processor chip.
˙Ipek et al. evaluated their learning controller in simulation by comparing it with three
other controllers: (1) the FR-FCFS controller mentioned above that produces the best
on-average performance, (2) a conventional controller that processes each request in
order, and (3) an unrealizable ideal controller, called the Optimistic controller, able
to sustain 100% DRAM throughput if given enough demand by ignoring all timing
and resource constraints, but otherwise modeling DRAM latency (as row bu↵er hits)
and bandwidth. They simulated nine memory-intensive parallel workloads consisting of
scientiﬁc and data-mining applications. Figure 16.4 shows the performance (the inverse
of execution time normalized to the performance of FR-FCFS) of each controller for
the nine applications, together with the geometric mean of their performances over the
applications. The learning controller, labeled RL in the ﬁgure, improved over that of
FR-FCFS by from 7% to 33% over the nine applications, with an average improvement of
19%. Of course, no realizable controller can match the performance of Optimistic, which
ignores all timing and resource constraints, but the learning controller’s performance
closed the gap with Optimistic’s upper bound by an impressive 27%.
Because the rationale for on-chip implementation of the learning algorithm was to
allow the scheduling policy to adapt online to changing workloads, ˙Ipek et al. analyzed
the impact of online learning compared to a previously-learned ﬁxed policy. They trained
Figure 16.4: Performances of four controllers over a suite of 9 simulated benchmark applications.
The controllers are: the simplest ‘in-order’ controller, FR-FCFS, the learning controller RL,
and the unrealizable Optimistic controller which ignores all timing and resource constraints to
provide a performance upper bound. Performance, normalized to that of FR-FCFS, is the inverse
of execution time. At far right is the geometric mean of performances over the 9 benchmark
applications for each controller. Controller RL comes closest to the ideal performance. ©2009
IEEE. Reprinted, with permission, from J. F. Mart´ınez and E. ˙Ipek, Dynamic multicore resource
management: A machine learning approach, Micro, IEEE, 29(5), p. 13.


--- Page 458 ---

436
Chapter 16: Applications and Case Studies
their controller with data from all nine benchmark applications and then held the resulting
action values ﬁxed throughout the simulated execution of the applications. They found
that the average performance of the controller that learned online was 8% better than
that of the controller using the ﬁxed policy, leading them to conclude that online learning
is an important feature of their approach.
This learning memory controller was never committed to physical hardware because of
the large cost of fabrication. Nevertheless, ˙Ipek et al. could convincingly argue on the basis
of their simulation results that a memory controller that learns online via reinforcement
learning has the potential to improve performance to levels that would otherwise require
more complex and more expensive memory systems, while removing from human designers
some of the burden required to manually design eﬃcient scheduling policies. Mukundan
and Mart´ınez (2012) took this project forward by investigating learning controllers with
additional actions, other performance criteria, and more complex reward functions derived
using genetic algorithms. They considered additional performance criteria related to
energy eﬃciency. The results of these studies surpassed the earlier results described
above and signiﬁcantly surpassed the 2012 state-of-the-art for all of the performance
criteria they considered. The approach is especially promising for developing sophisticated
power-aware DRAM interfaces.
16.5
Human-level Video Game Play
One of the greatest challenges in applying reinforcement learning to real-world problems
is deciding how to represent and store value functions and/or policies. Unless the state
set is ﬁnite and small enough to allow exhaustive representation by a lookup table—as in
many of our illustrative examples—one must use a parameterized function approximation
scheme. Whether linear or nonlinear, function approximation relies on features that
have to be readily accessible to the learning system and able to convey the information
necessary for skilled performance. Most successful applications of reinforcement learning
owe much to sets of features carefully handcrafted based on human knowledge and
intuition about the speciﬁc problem to be tackled.
A team of researchers at Google DeepMind developed an impressive demonstration that
a deep multi-layer ANN can automate the feature design process (Mnih et al., 2013, 2015).
Multi-layer ANNs have been used for function approximation in reinforcement learning
ever since the 1986 popularization of the backpropagation algorithm as a method for
learning internal representations (Rumelhart, Hinton, and Williams, 1986; see Section 9.7).
Striking results have been obtained by coupling reinforcement learning with backpropa-
gation. The results obtained by Tesauro and colleagues with TD-Gammon and Watson
discussed above are notable examples. These and other applications beneﬁted from the
ability of multi-layer ANNs to learn task-relevant features. However, in all the examples
of which we are aware, the most impressive demonstrations required the network’s input
to be represented in terms of specialized features handcrafted for the given problem.
This is vividly apparent in the TD-Gammon results. TD-Gammon 0.0, whose network
input was essentially a “raw” representation of the backgammon board, meaning that it
involved very little knowledge of backgammon, learned to play approximately as well as


--- Page 459 ---

16.5. Human-level Video Game Play
437
the best previous backgammon computer programs. Adding specialized backgammon
features produced TD-Gammon 1.0 which was substantially better than all previous
backgammon programs and competed well against human experts.
Mnih et al. developed a reinforcement learning agent called deep Q-network (DQN)
that combined Q-learning with a deep convolutional ANN, a many-layered, or deep,
ANN specialized for processing spatial arrays of data such as images. We describe deep
convolutional ANNs in Section 9.7. By the time of Mnih et al.’s work with DQN, deep
ANNs, including deep convolutional ANNs, had produced impressive results in many
applications, but they had not been widely used in reinforcement learning.
Mnih et al. used DQN to show how a reinforcement learning agent can achieve a high
level of performance on any of a collection of di↵erent problems without having to use
di↵erent problem-speciﬁc feature sets. To demonstrate this, they let DQN learn to play
49 di↵erent Atari 2600 video games by interacting with a game emulator. DQN learned a
di↵erent policy for each of the 49 games (because the weights of its ANN were reset to
random values before learning on each game), but it used the same raw input, network
architecture, and parameter values (e.g., step size, discount rate, exploration parameters,
and many more speciﬁc to the implementation) for all the games. DQN achieved levels
of play at or beyond human level on a large fraction of these games. Although the games
were alike in being played by watching streams of video images, they varied widely in other
respects. Their actions had di↵erent e↵ects, they had di↵erent state-transition dynamics,
and they needed di↵erent policies for learning high scores. The deep convolutional ANN
learned to transform the raw input common to all the games into features specialized for
representing the action values required for playing at the high level DQN achieved for
most of the games.
The Atari 2600 is a home video game console that was sold in various versions by Atari
Inc. from 1977 to 1992. It introduced or popularized many arcade video games that are
now considered classics, such as Pong, Breakout, Space Invaders, and Asteroids. Although
much simpler than modern video games, Atari 2600 games are still entertaining and
challenging for human players, and they have been attractive as testbeds for developing
and evaluating reinforcement learning methods (Diuk, Cohen, Littman, 2008; Naddaf,
2010; Cobo, Zang, Isbell, and Thomaz, 2011; Bellemare, Veness, and Bowling, 2013).
Bellemare, Naddaf, Veness, and Bowling (2012) developed the publicly available Arcade
Learning Environment (ALE) to encourage and simplify using Atari 2600 games to study
learning and planning algorithms.
These previous studies and the availability of ALE made the Atari 2600 game collection
a good choice for Mnih et al.’s demonstration, which was also inﬂuenced by the impressive
human-level performance that TD-Gammon was able to achieve in backgammon. DQN
is similar to TD-Gammon in using a multi-layer ANN as the function approximation
method for a semi-gradient form of a TD algorithm, with the gradients computed by
the backpropagation algorithm. However, instead of using TD(λ) as TD-Gammon did,
DQN used the semi-gradient form of Q-learning. TD-Gammon estimated the values of
afterstates, which were easily obtained from the rules for making backgammon moves.
To use the same algorithm for the Atari games would have required generating the next
states for each possible action (which would not have been afterstates in that case).
This could have been done by using the game emulator to run single-step simulations


--- Page 460 ---

438
Chapter 16: Applications and Case Studies
for all the possible actions (which ALE makes possible). Or a model of each game’s
state-transition function could have been learned and used to predict next states (Oh,
Guo, Lee, Lewis, and Singh, 2015). While these methods might have produced results
comparable to DQN’s, they would have been more complicated to implement and would
have signiﬁcantly increased the time needed for learning. Another motivation for using
Q-learning was that DQN used the experience replay method, described below, which
requires an o↵-policy algorithm. Being model-free and o↵-policy made Q-learning a
natural choice.
Before describing the details of DQN and how the experiments were conducted, we look
at the skill levels DQN was able to achieve. Mnih et al. compared the scores of DQN with
the scores of the best performing learning system in the literature at the time, the scores
of a professional human games tester, and the scores of an agent that selected actions at
random. The best system from the literature used linear function approximation with
features designed using some knowledge about Atari 2600 games (Bellemare, Naddaf,
Veness, and Bowling, 2013). DQN learned on each game by interacting with the game
emulator for 50 million frames, which corresponds to about 38 days of experience with
the game. At the start of learning on each game, the weights of DQN’s network were reset
to random values. To evaluate DQN’s skill level after learning, its score was averaged
over 30 sessions on each game, each lasting up to 5 minutes and beginning with a random
initial game state. The professional human tester played using the same emulator (with
the sound turned o↵to remove any possible advantage over DQN which did not process
audio). After 2 hours of practice, the human played about 20 episodes of each game for up
to 5 minutes each and was not allowed to take any break during this time. DQN learned
to play better than the best previous reinforcement learning systems on all but 6 of the
games, and played better than the human player on 22 of the games. By considering any
performance that scored at or above 75% of the human score to be comparable to, or
better than, human-level play, Mnih et al. concluded that the levels of play DQN learned
reached or exceeded human level on 29 of the 46 games. See Mnih et al. (2015) for a
more detailed account of these results.
For an artiﬁcial learning system to achieve these levels of play would be impressive
enough, but what makes these results remarkable—and what many at the time considered
to be breakthrough results for artiﬁcial intelligence—is that the very same learning system
achieved these levels of play on widely varying games without relying on any game-speciﬁc
modiﬁcations.
A human playing any of these 49 Atari games sees 210⇥160 pixel image frames with
128 colors at 60Hz. In principle, exactly these images could have formed the raw input to
DQN, but to reduce memory and processing requirements, Mnih et al. preprocessed each
frame to produce an 84⇥84 array of luminance values. Because the full states of many
of the Atari games are not completely observable from the image frames, Mnih et al.
“stacked” the four most recent frames so that the inputs to the network had dimension
84⇥84⇥4. This did not eliminate partial observability for all of the games, but it was
helpful in making many of them more Markovian.
An essential point here is that these preprocessing steps were exactly the same for all 46
games. No game-speciﬁc prior knowledge was involved beyond the general understanding
that it should still be possible to learn good policies with this reduced dimension and


--- Page 461 ---

16.5. Human-level Video Game Play
439
that stacking adjacent frames should help with the partial observability of some of the
games. Because no game-speciﬁc prior knowledge beyond this minimal amount was used
in preprocessing the image frames, we can think of the 84⇥84⇥4 input vectors as being
“raw” input to DQN.
The basic architecture of DQN is similar to the deep convolutional ANN illustrated in
Figure 9.15 (though unlike that network, subsampling in DQN is treated as part of each
convolutional layer, with feature maps consisting of units having only a selection of the
possible receptive ﬁelds). DQN has three hidden convolutional layers, followed by one
fully connected hidden layer, followed by the output layer. The three successive hidden
convolutional layers of DQN produce 32 20⇥20 feature maps, 64 9⇥9 feature maps,
and 64 7⇥7 feature maps. The activation function of the units of each feature map is a
rectiﬁer nonlinearity (max(0, x)). The 3,136 (64⇥7⇥7) units in this third convolutional
layer all connect to each of 512 units in the fully connected hidden layer, which then each
connect to all 18 units in the output layer, one for each possible action in an Atari game.
The activation levels of DQN’s output units were the estimated optimal action values
of the corresponding state–action pairs, for the state represented by the network’s input.
The assignment of output units to a game’s actions varied from game to game, and
because the number of valid actions varied between 4 and 18 for the games, not all output
units had functional roles in all of the games. It helps to think of the network as if it
were 18 separate networks, one for estimating the optimal action value of each possible
action. In reality, these networks shared their initial layers, but the output units learned
to use the features extracted by these layers in di↵erent ways.
DQN’s reward signal indicated how a games’s score changed from one time step to
the next: +1 whenever it increased, −1 whenever it decreased, and 0 otherwise. This
standardized the reward signal across the games and made a single step-size parameter
work well for all the games despite their varying ranges of scores. DQN used an "-greedy
policy, with " decreasing linearly over the ﬁrst million frames and remaining at a low
value for the rest of the learning session. The values of the various other parameters,
such as the learning step size, discount rate, and others speciﬁc to the implementation,
were selected by performing informal searches to see which values worked best for a small
selection of the games. These values were then held ﬁxed for all of the games.
After DQN selected an action, the action was executed by the game emulator, which
returned a reward and the next video frame. The frame was preprocessed and added
to the four-frame stack that became the next input to the network. Skipping for the
moment the changes to the basic Q-learning procedure made by Mnih et al., DQN used
the following semi-gradient form of Q-learning to update the network’s weights:
wt+1 = wt + ↵
h
Rt+1 + γ max
a
ˆq(St+1, a, wt) −ˆq(St, At, wt)
i
rˆq(St, At, wt), (16.3)
where wt is the vector of the network’s weights, At is the action selected at time step t,
and St and St+1 are respectively the preprocessed image stacks input to the network at
time steps t and t + 1.
The gradient in (16.3) was computed by backpropagation. Imagining again that there
was a separate network for each action, for the update at time step t, backpropagation
was applied only to the network corresponding to At. Mnih et al. took advantage of
techniques shown to improve the basic backpropagation algorithm when applied to large


--- Page 462 ---

440
Chapter 16: Applications and Case Studies
networks. They used a mini-batch method that updated weights only after accumulating
gradient information over a small batch of images (here after 32 images). This yielded
smoother sample gradients compared to the usual procedure that updates weights after
each action. They also used a gradient-ascent algorithm called RMSProp (Tieleman and
Hinton, 2012) that accelerates learning by adjusting the step-size parameter for each
weight based on a running average of the magnitudes of recent gradients for that weight.
Mnih et al. modiﬁed the basic Q-learning procedure in three ways. First, they used
a method called experience replay ﬁrst studied by Lin (1992). This method stores the
agent’s experience at each time step in a replay memory that is accessed to perform the
weight updates. It worked like this in DQN. After the game emulator executed action
At in a state represented by the image stack St, and returned reward Rt+1 and image
stack St+1, it added the tuple (St, At, Rt+1, St+1) to the replay memory. This memory
accumulated experiences over many plays of the same game. At each time step multiple Q-
learning updates—a mini-batch—were performed based on experiences sampled uniformly
at random from the replay memory. Instead of St+1 becoming the new St for the next
update as it would in the usual form of Q-learning, a new unconnected experience was
drawn from the replay memory to supply data for the next update. Because Q-learning
is an o↵-policy algorithm, it does not need to be applied along connected trajectories.
Q-learning with experience replay provided several advantages over the usual form of
Q-learning. The ability to use each stored experience for many updates allowed DQN to
learn more eﬃciently from its experiences. Experience replay reduced the variance of the
updates because successive updates were not correlated with one another as they would
be with standard Q-learning. And by removing the dependence of successive experiences
on the current weights, experience replay eliminated one source of instability.
Mnih et al. modiﬁed standard Q-learning in a second way to improve its stability. As
in other methods that bootstrap, the target for a Q-learning update depends on the
current action-value function estimate. When a parameterized function approximation
method is used to represent action values, the target is a function of the same parameters
that are being updated.
For example, the target in the update given by (16.3) is
γ maxa ˆq(St+1, a, wt). Its dependence on wt complicates the process compared to the
simpler supervised-learning situation in which the targets do not depend on the parameters
being updated. As discussed in Chapter 11 this can lead to oscillations and/or divergence.
To address this problem Mnih et al. used a technique that brought Q-learning closer
to the simpler supervised-learning case while still allowing it to bootstrap. Whenever
a certain number, C, of updates had been done to the weights w of the action-value
network, they inserted the network’s current weights into another network and held
these duplicate weights ﬁxed for the next C updates of w. The outputs of this duplicate
network over the next C updates of w were used as the Q-learning targets. Letting ˜q
denote the output of this duplicate network, then instead of (16.3) the update rule was:
wt+1 = wt + ↵
h
Rt+1 + γ max
a
˜q(St+1, a, wt) −ˆq(St, At, wt)
i
rˆq(St, At, wt).
A ﬁnal modiﬁcation of standard Q-learning was also found to improve stability. They
clipped the error term Rt+1 + γ maxa ˜q(St+1, a, wt) −ˆq(St, At, wt) so that it remained in
the interval [−1, 1].


--- Page 463 ---

16.6. Mastering the Game of Go
441
Mnih et al. conducted a large number of learning runs on 5 of the games to gain
insight into the e↵ect that various of DQN’s design features had on its performance.
They ran DQN with the four combinations of experience replay and the duplicate
target network being included or not included. Although the results varied from game
to game, each of these features alone signiﬁcantly improved performance, and very
dramatically improved performance when used together. Mnih et al. also studied the role
played by the deep convolutional ANN in DQN’s learning ability by comparing the deep
convolutional version of DQN with a version having a network of just one linear layer, both
receiving the same stacked preprocessed video frames. Here, the improvement of the deep
convolutional version over the linear version was particularly striking across all 5 of the test
games.
Creating artiﬁcial agents that excel over a diverse collection of challenging tasks has
been an enduring goal of artiﬁcial intelligence. The promise of machine learning as
a means for achieving this has been frustrated by the need to craft problem-speciﬁc
representations. DeepMind’s DQN stands as a major step forward by demonstrating
that a single agent can learn problem-speciﬁc features enabling it to acquire human-
competitive skills over a range of tasks. This demonstration did not produce one agent
that simultaneously excelled at all the tasks (because learning occurred separately for
each task), but it showed that deep learning can reduce, and possibly eliminate, the need
for problem-speciﬁc design and tuning. As Mnih et al. point out, however, DQN is not
a complete solution to the problem of task-independent learning. Although the skills
needed to excel on the Atari games were markedly diverse, all the games were played by
observing video images, which made a deep convolutional ANN a natural choice for this
collection of tasks. In addition, DQN’s performance on some of the Atari 2600 games
fell considerably short of human skill levels on these games. The games most diﬃcult
for DQN—especially Montezuma’s Revenge on which DQN learned to perform about as
well as the random player—require deep planning beyond what DQN was designed to
do. Further, learning control skills through extensive practice, like DQN learned how to
play the Atari games, is just one of the types of learning humans routinely accomplish.
Despite these limitations, DQN advanced the state-of-the-art in machine learning by
impressively demonstrating the promise of combining reinforcement learning with modern
methods of deep learning.
16.6
Mastering the Game of Go
The ancient Chinese game of Go has challenged artiﬁcial intelligence researchers for many
decades. Methods that achieve human-level skill, or even superhuman-level skill, in other
games have not been successful in producing strong Go programs. Thanks to a very
active community of Go programmers and international competitions, the level of Go
program play has improved signiﬁcantly over the years. Until recently, however, no Go
program had been able to play anywhere near the level of a human Go master.
A team at DeepMind (Silver et al., 2016) developed the program AlphaGo that broke
this barrier by combining deep ANNs (Section 9.7), supervised learning, Monte Carlo


--- Page 464 ---

442
Chapter 16: Applications and Case Studies
tree search (MCTS, Section 8.11), and reinforcement learning. By the time of Silver et
al.’s 2016 publication, AlphaGo had been shown to be decisively stronger than other Go
programs, and it had defeated the European Go champion Fan Hui 5 games to 0. These
were the ﬁrst victories of a Go program over a professional human Go player without
handicap in full Go games. Shortly thereafter, a similar version of AlphaGo won stunning
victories over the 18-time world champion Lee Sedol, winning 4 out of a 5 games in
a challenge match, making worldwide headline news. Artiﬁcial intelligence researchers
thought that it would be many more years, perhaps decades, before a program reached
this level of play.
Here we describe AlphaGo and a successor program called AlphaGo Zero (Silver et al.
2017a). Where in addition to reinforcement learning, AlphaGo relied on supervised learn-
ing from a large database of expert human moves, AlphaGo Zero used only reinforcement
learning and no human data or guidance beyond the basic rules of the game (hence the
Zero in its name). We ﬁrst describe AlphaGo in some detail in order to highlight the
relative simplicity of AlphaGo Zero, which is both higher-performing and more of a pure
reinforcement learning program.
In many ways, both AlphaGo and AlphaGo Zero are descendants of Tesauro’s TD-
Gammon (Section 16.1), itself a descendant of Samuel’s checkers player (Section 16.2).
All these programs included reinforcement learning over simulated games of self-play.
AlphaGo and AlphaGo Zero also built upon the progress made by DeepMind on playing
Atari games with the program DQN (Section 16.5) that used deep convolutional ANNs
to approximate optimal value functions.
A Go board conﬁguration
Go is a game between two players who alter-
nately place black and white ‘stones’ on unoccu-
pied intersections, or ‘points,’ on a board with
a grid of 19 horizontal and 19 vertical lines to
produce positions like that shown to the right.
The game’s goal is to capture an area of the
board larger than that captured by the oppo-
nent. Stones are captured according to simple
rules. A player’s stones are captured if they
are completely surrounded by the other player’s
stones, meaning that there is no horizontally
or vertically adjacent point that is unoccupied.
For example, the left panel of Figure 16.5 (on
the next page) shows three white stones with
an unoccupied adjacent point (labeled X). If
black were to place a stone on X, then the three
white stones would be captured and taken o↵
the board (middle panel). However, if white were to place a stone on point X ﬁrst, then
the possibility of this capture would be blocked (right panel). Other rules are needed to
prevent inﬁnite capturing/recapturing loops. The game ends when neither player wishes
to place another stone. These rules are simple, but they produce a very complex game
that has had wide appeal for thousands of years.


--- Page 465 ---

16.6. Mastering the Game of Go
443
X
Figure 16.5: Go capturing rule. Left: the three white stones are not surrounded because point
X is unoccupied. Middle: if black places a stone on X, the three white stones are captured and
removed from the board. Right: if white places a stone on point X ﬁrst, the capture is blocked.
Methods that produce strong play for other games, such as chess, have not worked as
well for Go. The search space for Go is signiﬁcantly larger than that of chess because
Go has a larger number of legal moves per position than chess (⇡250 versus ⇡35) and
Go games tend to involve more moves than chess games (⇡150 versus ⇡80). But the
size of the search space is not the major factor that makes Go so diﬃcult. Exhaustive
search is infeasible for both chess and Go, and Go on smaller boards (e.g., 9 ⇥9) has
proven to be exceedingly diﬃcult as well. Experts agree that the major stumbling block
to creating stronger-than-amateur Go programs is the diﬃculty of deﬁning an adequate
position evaluation function. A good evaluation function allows search to be truncated at
a feasible depth by providing relatively easy-to-compute predictions of what deeper search
would likely yield. According to M¨uller (2002): “No simple yet reasonable evaluation
function will ever be found for Go.” A major step forward was the introduction of MCTS
to Go programs. The strongest programs at the time of AlphaGo’s development all
included MCTS, but master-level skill remained elusive.
Recall from Section 8.11 that MCTS is a decision-time planning procedure that does
not attempt to learn and store a global evaluation function. Like a rollout algorithm
(Section 8.10), it runs many Monte Carlo simulations of entire episodes (here, entire
Go games) to select each action (here, each Go move: where to place a stone or to
resign). Unlike a simple rollout algorithm, however, MCTS is an iterative procedure that
incrementally extends a search tree whose root node represents the current environment
state.
As illustrated in Figure 8.10, each iteration traverses the tree by simulating
actions guided by statistics associated with the tree’s edges. In its basic version, when
a simulation reaches a leaf node of the search tree, MCTS expands the tree by adding
some, or all, of the leaf node’s children to the tree. From the leaf node, or one of its
newly added child nodes, a rollout is executed: a simulation that typically proceeds all
the way to a terminal state, with actions selected by a rollout policy. When the rollout
completes, the statistics associated with the search tree’s edges that were traversed in
this iteration are updated by backing up the return produced by the rollout. MCTS
continues this process, starting each time at the search tree’s root at the current state, for
as many iterations as possible given the time constraints. Then, ﬁnally, an action from
the root node (which still represents the current environment state) is selected according
to statistics accumulated in the root node’s outgoing edges. This is the action the agent
takes. After the environment transitions to its next state, MCTS is executed again with
the root node set to represent the new current state. The search tree at the start of this
next execution might be just this new root node, or it might include descendants of this
node left over from MCTS’s previous execution. The remainder of the tree is discarded.


--- Page 466 ---

444
Chapter 16: Applications and Case Studies
16.6.1
AlphaGo
The main innovation that made AlphaGo such a strong player is that it selected moves by
a novel version of MCTS that was guided by both a policy and a value function learned
by reinforcement learning with function approximation provided by deep convolutional
ANNs. Another key feature is that instead of reinforcement learning starting from random
network weights, it started from weights that were the result of previous supervised
learning from a large collection of human expert moves.
The DeepMind team called AlphaGo’s modiﬁcation of basic MCTS “asynchronous
policy and value MCTS,” or APV-MCTS. It selected actions via basic MCTS as described
above but with some twists in how it extended its search tree and how it evaluated action
edges. In contrast to basic MCTS, which expands its current search tree by using stored
action values to select an unexplored edge from a leaf node, APV-MCTS, as implemented
in AlphaGo, expanded its tree by choosing an edge according to probabilities supplied by
a 13-layer deep convolutional ANN, called the SL-policy network, trained previously by
supervised learning to predict moves contained in a database of nearly 30 million human
expert moves.
Then, also in contrast to basic MCTS, which evaluates the newly-added state node
solely by the return of a rollout initiated from it, APV-MCTS evaluated the node in two
ways: by this return of the rollout, but also by a value function, v✓, learned previously by
a reinforcement learning method. If s was the newly-added node, its value became
v(s) = (1 −⌘)v✓(s) + ⌘G,
(16.4)
where G was the return of the rollout and ⌘controlled the mixing of the values resulting
from these two evaluation methods. In AlphaGo, these values were supplied by the
value network, another 13-layer deep convolutional ANN that was trained as we describe
below to output estimated values of board positions. APV-MCTS’s rollouts in AlphaGo
were simulated games with both players using a fast rollout policy provided by a simple
linear network, also trained by supervised learning before play. Throughout its execution,
APV-MCTS kept track of how many simulations passed through each edge of the search
tree, and when its execution completed, the most-visited edge from the root node was
selected as the action to take, here the move AlphaGo actually made in a game.
The value network had the same structure as the deep convolutional SL policy network
except that it had a single output unit that gave estimated values of game positions
instead of the SL policy network’s probability distributions over legal actions. Ideally,
the value network would output optimal state values, and it might have been possible to
approximate the optimal value function along the lines of TD-Gammon described above:
self-play with nonlinear TD(λ) coupled to a deep convolutional ANN. But the DeepMind
team took a di↵erent approach that held more promise for a game as complex as Go.
They divided the process of training the value network into two stages. In the ﬁrst stage,
they created the best policy they could by using reinforcement learning to train an RL
policy network. This was a deep convolutional ANN with the same structure as the SL
policy network. It was initialized with the ﬁnal weights of the SL policy network that
were learned via supervised learning, and then policy-gradient reinforcement learning was
used to improve upon the SL policy. In the second stage of training the value network,


--- Page 467 ---

16.6. Mastering the Game of Go
445
the team used Monte Carlo policy evaluation on data obtained from a large number of
simulated self-play games with moves selected by the RL policy network.
Figure 16.6 illustrates the networks used by AlphaGo and the steps taken to train them
in what the DeepMind team called the “AlphaGo pipeline.” All these networks were
trained before any live game play took place, and their weights remained ﬁxed throughout
live play.
Regression
Classiﬁcation
Classiﬁcation
Self Play
Policy gradient
Human expert positions
Self-play positions
Rollout Policy         SL policy network                       RL policy Network          Value Network
Policy gradient
Supervised Learning
MC Policy Evaluation
Self Play
Supervised Learning
]
]
Networks
Data
Figure 16.6: AlphaGo pipeline. Adapted with permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd:
Nature, vol. 529(7587), p. 485, ©2016.
Here is some more detail about AlphaGo’s ANNs and their training. The identically-
structured SL and RL policy networks were similar to DQN’s deep convolutional network
described in Section 16.5 for playing Atari games, except that they had 13 convolutional
layers with the ﬁnal layer consisting of a soft-max unit for each point on the 19 ⇥19
Go board. The networks’ input was a 19 ⇥19 ⇥48 image stack in which each point
on the Go board was represented by the values of 48 binary or integer-valued features.
For example, for each point, one feature indicated if the point was occupied by one of
AlphaGo’s stones, one of its opponent’s stones, or was unoccupied, thus providing the
“raw” representation of the board conﬁguration. Other features were based on the rules
of Go, such as the number of adjacent points that were empty, the number of opponent
stones that would be captured by placing a stone there, the number of turns since a stone
was placed there, and other features that the design team considered to be important.
Training the SL policy network took approximately 3 weeks using a distributed
implementation of stochastic gradient ascent on 50 processors. The network achieved 57%
accuracy, where the best accuracy achieved by other groups at the time of publication
was 44.4%. Training the RL policy network was done by policy gradient reinforcement
learning over simulated games between the RL policy network’s current policy and
opponents using policies randomly selected from policies produced by earlier iterations
of the learning algorithm. Playing against a randomly selected collection of opponents


--- Page 468 ---

446
Chapter 16: Applications and Case Studies
prevented overﬁtting to the current policy. The reward signal was +1 if the current
policy won, −1 if it lost, and zero otherwise. These games directly pitted the two policies
against one another without involving MCTS. By simulating many games in parallel on
50 processors, the DeepMind team trained the RL policy network on a million games
in a single day. In testing the ﬁnal RL policy, they found that it won more than 80%
of games played against the SL policy, and it won 85% of games played against a Go
program using MCTS that simulated 100,000 games per move.
The value network, whose structure was similar to that of the SL and RL policy
networks except for its single output unit, received the same input as the SL and RL
policy networks with the exception that there was an additional binary feature giving
the current color to play. Monte Carlo policy evaluation was used to train the network
from data obtained from a large number of self-play games played using the RL policy.
To avoid overﬁtting and instability due to the strong correlations between positions
encountered in self-play, the DeepMind team constructed a data set of 30 million positions
each chosen randomly from a unique self-play game. Then training was done using 50
million mini-batches each of 32 positions drawn from this data set. Training took one
week on 50 GPUs.
The rollout policy was learned prior to play by a simple linear network trained by
supervised learning from a corpus of 8 million human moves. The rollout policy network
had to output actions quickly while still being reasonably accurate. In principle, the SL
or RL policy networks could have been used in the rollouts, but the forward propagation
through these deep networks took too much time for either of them to be used in rollout
simulations, a great many of which had to be carried out for each move decision during
live play. For this reason, the rollout policy network was less complex than the other
policy networks, and its input features could be computed more quickly than the features
used for the policy networks. The rollout policy network allowed approximately 1,000
complete game simulations per second to be run on each of the processing threads that
AlphaGo used.
One may wonder why the SL policy was used instead of the better RL policy to select
actions in the expansion phase of APV-MCTS. These policies took the same amount of
time to compute because they used the same network architecture. The team actually
found that AlphaGo played better against human opponents when APV-MCTS used as
the SL policy instead of the RL policy. They conjectured that the reason for this was
that the latter was tuned to respond to optimal moves rather than to the broader set
of moves characteristic of human play. Interestingly, the situation was reversed for the
value function used by APV-MCTS. They found that when APV-MCTS used the value
function derived from the RL policy, it performed better than if it used the value function
derived from the SL policy.
Several methods worked together to produce AlphaGo’s impressive playing skill. The
DeepMind team evaluated di↵erent versions of AlphaGo in order to assess the contributions
made by these various components. The parameter ⌘in (16.4) controlled the mixing
of game state evaluations produced by the value network and by rollouts. With ⌘= 0,
AlphaGo used just the value network without rollouts, and with ⌘= 1, evaluation
relied just on rollouts. They found that AlphaGo using just the value network played


--- Page 469 ---

16.6. Mastering the Game of Go
447
better than the rollout-only AlphaGo, and in fact played better than the strongest of all
other Go programs existing at the time. The best play resulted from setting ⌘= 0.5,
indicating that combining the value network with rollouts was particularly important
to AlphaGo’s success. These evaluation methods complemented one another: the value
network evaluated the high-performance RL policy that was too slow to be used in live
play, while rollouts using the weaker but much faster rollout policy were able to add
precision to the value network’s evaluations for speciﬁc states that occurred during games.
Overall, AlphaGo’s remarkable success fueled a new round of enthusiasm for the promise
of artiﬁcial intelligence, speciﬁcally for systems combining reinforcement learning with
deep ANNs, to address problems in other challenging domains.
16.6.2
AlphaGo Zero
Building upon the experience with AlphaGo, a DeepMind team developed AlphaGo Zero
(Silver et al. 2017a). In contrast to AlphaGo, this program used no human data or
guidance beyond the basic rules of the game (hence the Zero in its name). It learned
exclusively from self-play reinforcement learning, with input giving just “raw” descriptions
of the placements of stones on the Go board. AlphaGo Zero implemented a form of
policy iteration (Section 4.3), interleaving policy evaluation with policy improvement.
Figure 16.7 is an overview of AlphaGo Zero’s algorithm. A signiﬁcant di↵erence between
AlphaGo Zero and AlphaGo is that AlphaGo Zero used MCTS to select moves throughout
self-play reinforcement learning, whereas AlphaGo used MCTS for live play after—but not
during—learning. Other di↵erences besides not using any human data or human-crafted
features are that AlphaGo Zero used only one deep convolutional ANN and used a simpler
version of MCTS.
AlphaGo Zero’s MCTS was simpler than the version used by AlphaGo in that it did
not include rollouts of complete games, and therefore did not need a rollout policy. Each
iteration of AlphaGo Zero’s MCTS ran a simulation that ended at a leaf node of the
current search tree instead of at the terminal position of a complete game simulation.
But as in AlphaGo, each iteration of MCTS in AlphaGo Zero was guided by the output of
a deep convolutional network, labeled f✓in Figure 16.7, where ✓is the network’s weight
vector. The input to the network, whose architecture we describe below, consisted of raw
representations of board positions, and its output had two parts: a scalar value, v, an
estimate of the probability that the current player will win from from the current board
position, and a vector, p, of move probabilities, one for each possible stone placement on
the current board, plus the pass, or resign, move.
Instead of selecting self-play actions according to the probabilities p, however, AlphaGo
Zero used these probabilities, together with the network’s value output, to direct each
execution of MCTS, which returned new move probabilities, shown in Figure 16.7 as the
policies ⇡i. These policies beneﬁtted from the many simulations that MCTS conducted
each time it executed. The result was that the policy actually followed by AlphaGo
Zero was an improvement over the policy given by the network’s outputs p. Silver et al.
(2017a) wrote that “MCTS may therefore be viewed as a powerful policy improvement
operator.”


--- Page 470 ---

448
Chapter 16: Applications and Case Studies
Figure 16.7: AlphaGo Zero self-play reinforcement learning. a) The program played many
games against itself, one shown here as a sequence of board positions si, i = 1, 2, . . . , T, with
moves ai, i = 1, 2, . . . , T, and winner z. Each move ai was determined by action probabilities ⇡i
returned by MCTS executed from root node si and guided by a deep convolutional network,
here labeled f✓, with latest weights ✓. Shown here for just one position s but repeated for all
si, the network’s inputs were raw representations of board positions si (together with several
past positions, though not shown here), and its outputs were vectors p of move probabilities
that guided MCTS’s forward searches, and scalar values v that estimated the probability of the
current player winning from each position si. b) Deep convolutional network training. Training
examples were randomly sampled steps from recent self-play games. Weights ✓were updated
to move the policy vector p toward the probabilities ⇡returned by MCTS, and to include the
winners z in the estimated win probability v. Reprinted from draft of Silver et al. (2017a) with
permission of the authors and DeepMind.
Here is more detail about AlphaGo Zero’s ANN and how it was trained. The network
took as input a 19 ⇥19 ⇥17 image stack consisting of 17 binary feature planes. The ﬁrst
8 feature planes were raw representations of the positions of the current player’s stones in
the current and seven past board conﬁgurations: a feature value was 1 if a player’s stone
was on the corresponding point, and was 0 otherwise. The next 8 feature planes similarly
coded the positions of the opponent’s stones. A ﬁnal input feature plane had a constant
value indicating the color of the current play: 1 for black; 0 for white. Because repetition
is not allowed in Go and one player is given some number of “compensation points” for
not getting the ﬁrst move, the current board position is not a Markov state of Go. This
is why features describing past board positions and the color feature were needed.
The network was “two-headed,” meaning that after a number of initial layers, the
network split into two separate “heads” of additional layers that separately fed into two
sets of output units. In this case, one head fed 362 output units producing 192 + 1 move


--- Page 471 ---

16.6. Mastering the Game of Go
449
probabilities p, one for each possible stone placement plus pass; the other head fed just
one output unit producing the scalar v, an estimate of the probability that the current
player will win from the current board position. The network before the split consisted of
41 convolutional layers, each followed by batch normalization, and with skip connections
added to implement residual learning by pairs of layers (see Section 9.7). Overall, move
probabilities and values were computed by 43 and 44 layers respectively.
Starting with random weights, the network was trained by stochastic gradient descent
(with momentum, regularization, and step-size parameter decreasing as training continues)
using batches of examples sampled uniformly at random from all the steps of the most
recent 500,000 games of self-play with the current best policy. Extra noise was added
to the network’s output p to encourage exploration of all possible moves. At periodic
checkpoints during training, which Silver et al. (2017a) chose to be at every 1,000 training
steps, the policy output by the ANN with the latest weights was evaluated by simulating
400 games (using MCTS with 1,600 iterations to select each move) against the current
best policy. If the new policy won (by a margin set to reduce noise in the outcome), then
it became the best policy to be used in subsequent self-play. The network’s weights were
updated to make the network’s policy output p more closely match the policy returned
by MCTS, and to make its value output, v, more closely match the probability that the
current best policy wins from the board position represented by the network’s input.
The DeepMind team trained AlphaGo Zero over 4.9 million games of self-play, which
took about 3 days. Each move of each game was selected by running MCTS for 1,600
iterations, taking approximately 0.4 second per move. Network weights were updated over
700,000 batches each consisting of 2,048 board conﬁgurations. They then ran tournaments
with the trained AlphaGo Zero playing against the version of AlphaGo that defeated Fan
Hui by 5 games to 0, and against the version that defeated Lee Sedol by 4 games to 1.
They used the Elo rating system to evaluate the relative performances of the programs.
The di↵erence between two Elo ratings is meant to predict the outcome of games between
the players. The Elo ratings of AlphaGo Zero, the version of AlphaGo that played against
Fan Hui, and the version that played against Lee Sedol were respectively 4,308, 3,144,
and 3,739. The gaps in these Elo ratings translate into predictions that AlphaGo Zero
would defeat these other programs with probabilities very close to one. In a match of 100
games between AlphaGo Zero, trained as described, and the exact version of AlphaGo
that defeated Lee Sedol held under the same conditions that were used in that match,
AlphaGo Zero defeated AlphaGo in all 100 games.
The DeepMind team also compared AlphaGo Zero with a program using an ANN with
the same architecture but trained by supervised learning to predict human moves in a
data set containing nearly 30 million positions from 160,000 games. They found that the
supervised-learning player initially played better than AlphaGo Zero, and was better at
predicting human expert moves, but played less well after AlphaGo Zero was trained for
a day. This suggested that AlphaGo Zero had discovered a strategy for playing that was
di↵erent from how humans play. In fact, AlphaGo Zero discovered, and came to prefer,
some novel variations of classical move sequences.
Final tests of AlphaGo Zero’s algorithm were conducted with a version having a larger
ANN and trained over 29 million self-play games, which took about 40 days, again starting


--- Page 472 ---

450
Chapter 16: Applications and Case Studies
with random weights. This version achieved an Elo rating of 5,185. The team pitted
this version of AlphaGo Zero against a program called AlphaGo Master, the strongest
program at the time, that was identical to AlphaGo Zero but, like AlphaGo, used human
data and features. AlphaGo Master’s Elo rating was 4,858, and it had defeated the
strongest human professional players 60 to 0 in online games. In a 100 game match,
AlphaGo Zero with the larger network and more extensive learning defeated AlphaGo
Master 89 games to 11, thus providing a convincing demonstration of the problem-solving
power of AlphaGo Zero’s algorithm.
AlphaGo Zero soundly demonstrated that superhuman performance can be achieved
by pure reinforcement learning, augmented by a simple version of MCTS, and deep ANNs
with very minimal knowledge of the domain and no reliance on human data or guidance.
We will surely see systems inspired by the DeepMind accomplishments of both AlphaGo
and AlphaGo Zero applied to challenging problems in other domains.
Recently, yet a better program, AlphaZero, was described by Silver et al. (2017b) that
does not even incorporate knowledge of Go. AlphaZero is a general reinforcement learning
algorithm that improves over the world’s hitherto best programs in the diverse games of
Go, chess, and shogi.
16.7
Personalized Web Services
Personalizing web services such as the delivery of news articles or advertisements is one
approach to increasing users’ satisfaction with a website or to increase the yield of a
marketing campaign. A policy can recommend content considered to be the best for each
particular user based on a proﬁle of that user’s interests and preferences inferred from
their history of online activity. This is a natural domain for machine learning, and in
particular, for reinforcement learning. A reinforcement learning system can improve a
recommendation policy by making adjustments in response to user feedback. One way
to obtain user feedback is by means of website satisfaction surveys, but for acquiring
feedback in real time it is common to monitor user clicks as indicators of interest in a
link.
A method long used in marketing called A/B testing is a simple type of reinforcement
learning used to decide which of two versions, A or B, of a website users prefer. Because
it is non-associative, like a two-armed bandit problem, this approach does not personalize
content delivery. Adding context consisting of features describing individual users and
the content to be delivered allows personalizing service. This has been formalized as a
contextual bandit problem (or an associative reinforcement learning problem, Section 2.9)
with the objective of maximizing the total number of user clicks. Li, Chu, Langford, and
Schapire (2010) applied a contextual bandit algorithm to the problem of personalizing
the Yahoo! Front Page Today webpage (one of the most visited pages on the internet at
the time of their research) by selecting the news story to feature. Their objective was to
maximize the click-through rate (CTR), which is the ratio of the total number of clicks
all users make on a webpage to the total number of visits to the page. Their contextual
bandit algorithm improved over a standard non-associative bandit algorithm by 12.5%.
Theocharous, Thomas, and Ghavamzadeh (2015) argued that better results are possible


--- Page 473 ---

16.7. Personalized Web Services
451
by formulating personalized recommendation as a Markov decision problem (MDP) with
the objective of maximizing the total number of clicks users make over repeated visits to
a website. Policies derived from the contextual bandit formulation are greedy in the sense
that they do not take long-term e↵ects of actions into account. These policies e↵ectively
treat each visit to a website as if it were made by a new visitor uniformly sampled from
the population of the website’s visitors. By not using the fact that many users repeatedly
visit the same websites, greedy policies do not take advantage of possibilities provided by
long-term interactions with individual users.
As an example of how a marketing strategy might take advantage of long-term user
interaction, Theocharous et al. contrasted a greedy policy with a longer-term policy for
displaying ads for buying a product, say a car. The ad displayed by the greedy policy
might o↵er a discount if the user buys the car immediately. A user either takes the o↵er
or leaves the website, and if they ever return to the site, they would likely see the same
o↵er. A longer-term policy, on the other hand, can transition the user “down a sales
funnel” before presenting the ﬁnal deal. It might start by describing the availability of
favorable ﬁnancing terms, then praise an excellent service department, and then, on the
next visit, o↵er the ﬁnal discount. This type of policy can result in more clicks by a user
over repeated visits to the site, and if the policy is suitably designed, more eventual sales.
Working at Adobe Systems Incorporated, Theocharous et al. conducted experiments
to see if policies designed to maximize clicks over the long term could in fact improve
over short-term greedy policies. The Adobe Marketing Cloud, a set of tools that many
companies use to run digital marketing campaigns, provides infrastructure for automating
user-targeted advertising and fund-raising campaigns. Actually deploying novel policies
using these tools entails signiﬁcant risk because a new policy may end up performing
poorly. For this reason, the research team needed to assess what a policy’s performance
would be if it were to be actually deployed, but to do so on the basis of data collected
under the execution of other policies. A critical aspect of this research, then, was o↵-policy
evaluation. Further, the team wanted to do this with high conﬁdence to reduce the
risk of deploying a new policy. Although high conﬁdence o↵-policy evaluation was a
central component of this research (see also Thomas, 2015; Thomas, Theocharous, and
Ghavamzadeh, 2015), here we focus only on the algorithms and their results.
Theocharous et al. compared the results of two algorithms for learning ad recommen-
dation policies. The ﬁrst algorithm, which they called greedy optimization, had the goal
of maximizing only the probability of immediate clicks. As in the standard contextual
bandit formulation, this algorithm did not take the long-term e↵ects of recommendations
into account. The other algorithm, a reinforcement learning algorithm based on an MDP
formulation, aimed at improving the number of clicks users made over multiple visits to
a website. They called this latter algorithm life-time value (LTV) optimization. Both
algorithms faced challenging problems because the reward signal in this domain is very
sparse because users usually do not click on ads, and user clicking is very random so that
returns have high variance.
Data sets from the banking industry were used for training and testing these algorithms.
The data sets consisted of many complete trajectories of customer interaction with a
bank’s website that showed each customer one out of a collection of possible o↵ers. If


--- Page 474 ---

452
Chapter 16: Applications and Case Studies
a customer clicked, the reward was 1, and otherwise it was 0. One data set contained
approximately 200,000 interactions from a month of a bank’s campaign that randomly
o↵ered one of 7 o↵ers. The other data set from another bank’s campaign contained
4,000,000 interactions involving 12 possible o↵ers. All interactions included customer
features such as the time since the customer’s last visit to the website, the number of their
visits so far, the last time the customer clicked, geographic location, one of a collection of
interests, and features giving demographic information.
Greedy optimization was based on a mapping estimating the probability of a click
as a function of user features. The mapping was learned via supervised learning from
one of the data sets by means of a random forest (RF) algorithm (Breiman, 2001). RF
algorithms have been widely used for large-scale applications in industry because they are
e↵ective predictive tools that tend not to overﬁt and are relatively insensitive to outliers
and noise. Theocharous et al. then used the mapping to deﬁne an "-greedy policy that
selected with probability 1-" the o↵er predicted by the RF algorithm to have the highest
probability of producing a click, and otherwise selected from the other o↵ers uniformly at
random.
LTV optimization used a batch-mode reinforcement learning algorithm called ﬁtted
Q iteration (FQI). It is a variant of ﬁtted value iteration (Gordon, 1999) adapted to
Q-learning. Batch mode means that the entire data set for learning is available from
the start, as opposed to the online mode of the algorithms we focus on in this book in
which data are acquired sequentially while the learning algorithm executes. Batch-mode
reinforcement learning algorithms are sometimes necessary when online learning is not
practical, and they can use any batch-mode supervised learning regression algorithm,
including algorithms known to scale well to high-dimensional spaces. The convergence of
FQI depends on properties of the function approximation algorithm (Gordon, 1999). For
their application to LTV optimization, Theocharous et al. used the same RF algorithm
they used for the greedy optimization approach. Because in this case FQI convergence
is not monotonic, Theocharous et al. kept track of the best FQI policy by o↵-policy
evaluation using a validation training set. The ﬁnal policy for testing the LTV approach
was the "-greedy policy based on the best policy produced by FQI with the initial
action-value function set to the mapping produced by the RF for the greedy optimization
approach.
To measure the performance of the policies produced by the greedy and LTV approaches,
Theocharous et al. used the CTR metric and a metric they called the LTV metric. These
metrics are similar, except that the LTV metric critically distinguishes between individual
website visitors:
CTR = Total # of Clicks
Total # of Visits ,
LTV = Total # of Clicks
Total # of Visitors.
Figure 16.8 illustrates how these metrics di↵er. Each circle represents a user visit to
the site; black circles are visits at which the user clicks. Each row represents visits by
a particular user. By not distinguishing between visitors, the CTR for these sequences
is 0.35, whereas the LTV is 1.5. Because LTV is larger than CTR to the extent that


--- Page 475 ---

16.8. Thermal Soaring
453
individual users revisit the site, it is an indicator of how successful a policy is in encouraging
users to engage in extended interactions with the site.
Figure 16.8: Click through rate (CTR) versus life-time value (LTV). Each circle represents
a user visit; black circles are visits at which the user clicks. Adapted from Theocharous et
al. (2015).
Testing the policies produced by the greedy and LTV approaches was done using
a high conﬁdence o↵-policy evaluation method on a test data set consisting of real-
world interactions with a bank website served by a random policy. As expected, results
showed that greedy optimization performed best as measured by the CTR metric, while
LTV optimization performed best as measured by the LTV metric.
Furthermore—
although we have omitted its details—the high conﬁdence o↵-policy evaluation method
provided probabilistic guarantees that the LTV optimization method would, with high
probability, produce policies that improve upon policies currently deployed. Assured by
these probabilistic guarantees, Adobe announced in 2016 that the new LTV algorithm
would be a standard component of the Adobe Marketing Cloud so that a retailer could
issue a sequence of o↵ers following a policy likely to yield higher return than a policy
that is insensitive to long-term results.
16.8
Thermal Soaring
Birds and gliders take advantage of upward air currents—thermals—to gain altitude in
order to maintain ﬂight while expending little, or no, energy. Thermal soaring, as this
behavior is called, is a complex skill requiring responding to subtle environmental cues
to increase altitude by exploiting a rising column of air for as long as possible. Reddy,
Celani, Sejnowski, and Vergassola (2016) used reinforcement learning to investigate
thermal soaring policies that are e↵ective in the strong atmospheric turbulence usually
accompanying rising air currents. Their primary goal was to provide insight into the
cues birds sense and how they use them to achieve their impressive thermal soaring
performance, but the results also contribute to technology relevant to autonomous gliders.
Reinforcement learning had previously been applied to the problem of navigating eﬃciently
to the vicinity of a thermal updraft (Woodbury, Dunn, and Valasek, 2014) but not to the
more challenging problem of soaring within the turbulence of the updraft itself.
Reddy et al. modeled the soaring problem as a continuing MDP with discounting.
The agent interacted with a detailed model of a glider ﬂying in turbulent air. They


--- Page 476 ---

454
Chapter 16: Applications and Case Studies
devoted signiﬁcant e↵ort toward making the model generate realistic thermal soaring
conditions, including investigating several di↵erent approaches to atmospheric modeling.
For the learning experiments, air ﬂow in a three-dimensional box with one kilometer
sides, one of which was at ground level, was modeled by a sophisticated physics-based
set of partial di↵erential equations involving air velocity, temperature, and pressure.
Introducing small random perturbations into the numerical simulation caused the model
to produce analogs of thermal updrafts and accompanying turbulence (Figure 16.9 Left)
Glider ﬂight was modeled by aerodynamic equations involving velocity, lift, drag, and
other factors governing powerless ﬂight of a ﬁxed-wing aircraft. Maneuvering the glider
involved changing its angle of attack (the angle between the glider’s wing and the direction
of air ﬂow) and its bank angle (Figure 16.9 Right).
A
z
y
Lift L
z
x
Lift L
Drag D
velocity direction
wing direction
bank angle
glide angle
angle of attack
↵
Figure 16.9:
Thermal soaring model: Left: snapshot of the vertical velocity ﬁeld of the
simulated cube of air: in red (blue) is a region of large upward (downward) ﬂow. Right: diagram
of powerless ﬂight showing bank angle µ and angle of attack ↵. Adapted with permission From
PNAS vol. 113(22), p. E4879, 2016, Reddy, Celani, Sejnowski, and Vergassola, Learning to Soar
in Turbulent Environments.
The interface between the agent and the environment required deﬁning the agent’s
actions, the state information the agent receives from the environment, and the reward
signal. By experimenting with various possibilities, Reddy et al. decided that three actions
each for the angle of attack and the bank angle were enough for their purposes: increment
or decrement the current bank angle and angle of attack by 5◦and 2.5◦, respectively, or
leave them unchanged. This resulted in 32 possible actions. The bank angle was bounded
to remain between −15◦and +15◦.
Because a goal of their study was to try to determine what minimal set of sensory
cues are necessary for e↵ective soaring, both to shed light on the cues birds might use for
soaring and to minimize the sensing complexity required for automated glider soaring,
the authors tried various sets of signals as input to the reinforcement learning agent.
They started by using state aggregation (Section 9.3) of a four-dimensional state space
with dimensions giving local vertical wind speed, local vertical wind acceleration, torque
depending on the di↵erence between the vertical wind velocities at the left and right wing
tips, and the local temperature. Each dimension was discretized into three bins: positive


--- Page 477 ---

16.8. Thermal Soaring
455
high, negative high, and small. Results, described below, showed that only two of these
dimensions were critical for e↵ective soaring behavior.
The overall objective of thermal soaring is to gain as much altitude as possible from
each rising column of air. Reddy et al. tried a straightforward reward signal that rewarded
the agent at the end of each episode based on the altitude gained over the episode, a
large negative reward signal if the glider touched the ground, and zero otherwise. They
found that learning was not successful with this reward signal for episodes of realistic
duration and that eligibility traces did not help. By experimenting with various reward
signals, they found that learning was best with a reward signal that at each time step
linearly combined the vertical wind velocity and vertical wind acceleration observed on
the previous time step.
Learning was by one-step Sarsa, with actions selected according to a soft-max dis-
tribution based on normalized action values. Speciﬁcally, the action probabilities were
computed according to (13.2) with action preferences:
h(s, a, ✓) =
ˆq(s, a, ✓) −minb ˆq(s, b, ✓)
⌧
#
maxb ˆq(s, b, ✓) −minb ˆq(s, b, ✓)
$,
where ✓is a parameter vector with one component for each action and aggregated group
of states, and ˆq(s, a, ✓) merely returned the component corresponding to s, a in the usual
way for state aggregation methods. The above equation forms the action preferences
by normalizing the approximate action values to the interval [0, 1] then dividing by ⌧, a
positive “temperature parameter.”3 As ⌧increases, the probability of selecting an action
becomes less dependent on its preference; as ⌧decreases toward zero, the probability of
selecting the most highly-preferred action approaches one, making the policy approach
the greedy policy. The temperature parameter ⌧was initialized to 2.0 and incrementally
decreased to 0.2 during learning. Action preferences were computed from the current
estimates of the action values: the action with the maximum estimated action value was
given preference 1/⌧, the action with the minimum estimated action value was given
preference 0, and the preferences of the other actions were scaled between these extremes.
The step-size and discount-rate parameters were ﬁxed at 0.1 and 0.98 respectively.
Each learning episode took place with the agent controlling simulated ﬂight in an
independently generated period of simulated turbulent air currents. Each episode lasted
2.5 minutes simulated with a 1 second time step. Learning e↵ectively converged after a
few hundred episodes. The left panel of Figure 16.10 shows a sample trajectory before
learning where the agent selects actions randomly. Starting at the top of the volume
shown, the glider’s trajectory is in the direction indicated by the arrow and quickly loses
altitude. Figure 16.10’s right panel is a trajectory after learning. The glider starts at the
same place (here appearing at the bottom of the volume) and gains altitude by spiraling
within the rising column of air. Although Reddy et al. found that performance varied
widely over di↵erent simulated periods of air ﬂow, the number of times the glider touched
the ground consistently decreased to nearly zero as learning progressed.
After experimenting with di↵erent sets of features available to the learning agent, it
turned out that the combination of just vertical wind acceleration and torques worked
3Reddy et al. described this slightly di↵erently, but our version is equivalent to theirs.


--- Page 478 ---

456
Chapter 16: Applications and Case Studies
Figure 16.10:
Sample thermal soaring trajectories, with arrows showing the direction of
ﬂight from the same starting point (note that the altitude scales are shifted). Left: before
learning: the agent selects actions randomly and the glider descends. Right: after learning:
the glider gains altitude by following a spiral trajectory. Adapted with permission from PNAS
vol. 113(22), p. E4879, 2016, Reddy, Celani, Sejnowski, and Vergassola, Learning to Soar in
Turbulent Environments.
best. The authors conjectured that because these features give information about the
gradient of vertical wind velocity in two di↵erent directions, they allow the controller to
select between turning by changing the bank angle or continuing along the same course
by leaving the bank angle alone. This allows the glider to stay within a rising column of
air. Vertical wind velocity is indicative of the strength of the thermal but does not help
in staying within the ﬂow. They found that sensitivity to temperature was of little help.
They also found that controlling the angle of attack is not helpful in staying within a
particular thermal, being useful instead for traveling between thermals when covering
large distances, as in cross-country gliding and bird migration.
Due to the fact that soaring in di↵erent levels of turbulence requires di↵erent policies,
training was done in conditions ranging from weak to strong turbulence. In strong
turbulence the rapidly changing wind and glider velocities allowed less time for the
controller to react. This reduced the amount of control possible compared to what
was possible for maneuvering when ﬂuctuations were weak. Reddy et al. examined the
policies Sarsa learned under these di↵erent conditions. Common to policies learned in all
regimes were these features: when sensing negative wind acceleration, bank sharply in the
direction of the wing with the higher lift; when sensing large positive wind acceleration
and no torque, do nothing. However, di↵erent levels of turbulence led to policy di↵erences.
Policies learned in strong turbulence were more conservative in that they preferred small
bank angles, whereas in weak turbulence, the best action was to turn as much as possible
by banking sharply. Systematic study of the bank angles preferred by the policies learned
under the di↵erent conditions led the authors to suggest that by detecting when vertical


--- Page 479 ---

16.8. Thermal Soaring
457
wind acceleration crosses a certain threshold the controller can adjust its policy to cope
with di↵erent turbulence regimes.
Reddy et al. also conducted experiments to investigate the e↵ect of the discount-rate
parameter γ on the performance of the learned policies. They found that the altitude
gained in an episode increased as γ increased, reaching a maximum for γ = .99, suggesting
that e↵ective thermal soaring requires taking into account long-term e↵ects of control
decisions.
This computational study of thermal soaring illustrates how reinforcement learning
can further progress toward di↵erent kinds of objectives.
Learning policies having
access to di↵erent sets of environmental cues and control actions contributes to both
the engineering objective of designing autonomous gliders and the scientiﬁc objective of
improving understanding of the soaring skills of birds. In both cases, hypotheses resulting
from the learning experiments can be tested in the ﬁeld by instrumenting real gliders4
and by comparing predictions with observed bird soaring behavior.
4This work has recently been applied to real gliders. See Reddy, Wong-Ng, Celani, Sejnowski, and
Vergassola, “Glider soaring via reinforcement learning in the ﬁeld.” Nature 562:236–239, 2018.

