============================================================
 Chapter 15 - Neuroscience
 (PDF pages 399-442)
============================================================

--- Page 399 ---

Chapter 15
Neuroscience
Neuroscience is the multidisciplinary study of nervous systems: how they regulate bodily
functions; control behavior; change over time as a result of development, learning, and
aging; and how cellular and molecular mechanisms make these functions possible. One
of the most exciting aspects of reinforcement learning is the mounting evidence from
neuroscience that the nervous systems of humans and many other animals implement
algorithms that correspond in striking ways to reinforcement learning algorithms. The
main objective of this chapter is to explain these parallels and what they suggest about
the neural basis of reward-related learning in animals.
The most remarkable point of contact between reinforcement learning and neuroscience
involves dopamine, a chemical deeply involved in reward processing in the brains of mam-
mals. Dopamine appears to convey temporal-di↵erence (TD) errors to brain structures
where learning and decision making take place. This parallel is expressed by the reward
prediction error hypothesis of dopamine neuron activity, a hypothesis that resulted from
the convergence of computational reinforcement learning and results of neuroscience
experiments. In this chapter we discuss this hypothesis, the neuroscience ﬁndings that
led to it, and why it is a signiﬁcant contribution to understanding brain reward systems.
We also discuss parallels between reinforcement learning and neuroscience that are less
striking than this dopamine/TD-error parallel but that provide useful conceptual tools
for thinking about reward-based learning in animals. Other elements of reinforcement
learning have the potential to impact the study of nervous systems, but their connections
to neuroscience are still relatively undeveloped. We discuss several of these evolving
connections that we think will grow in importance over time.
As we outlined in the history section of this book’s introductory chapter (Section 1.7),
many aspects of reinforcement learning were inﬂuenced by neuroscience.
A second
objective of this chapter is to acquaint readers with ideas about brain function that have
contributed to our approach to reinforcement learning. Some elements of reinforcement
learning are easier to understand when seen in light of theories of brain function. This
is particularly true for the idea of the eligibility trace, one of the basic mechanisms
of reinforcement learning, that originated as a conjectured property of synapses, the
structures by which nerve cells—neurons—communicate with one another.


--- Page 400 ---

378
Chapter 15: Neuroscience
In this chapter we do not delve very deeply into the enormous complexity of the neural
systems underlying reward-based learning in animals: this chapter is too short, and we are
not neuroscientists. We do not try to describe—or even to name—the very many brain
structures and pathways, or any of the molecular mechanisms, believed to be involved in
these processes. We also do not do justice to hypotheses and models that are alternatives
to those that align so well with reinforcement learning. It should not be surprising that
there are di↵ering views among experts in the ﬁeld. We can only provide a glimpse into
this fascinating and developing story. We hope, though, that this chapter convinces
you that a very fruitful channel has emerged connecting reinforcement learning and its
theoretical underpinnings to the neuroscience of reward-based learning in animals.
Many excellent publications cover links between reinforcement learning and neuro-
science, some of which we cite in this chapter’s ﬁnal section. Our treatment di↵ers from
most of these because we assume familiarity with reinforcement learning as presented
in the earlier chapters of this book, but we do not assume knowledge of neuroscience.
We begin with a brief introduction to the neuroscience concepts needed for a basic
understanding of what is to follow.
15.1
Neuroscience Basics
Some basic information about nervous systems is helpful for following what we cover in
this chapter. Terms that we refer to later are italicized. Skipping this section will not be
a problem if you already have an elementary knowledge of neuroscience.
Neurons, the main components of nervous systems, are cells specialized for processing
and transmitting information using electrical and chemical signals. They come in many
forms, but a neuron typically has a cell body, dendrites, and a single axon. Dendrites
are structures that branch from the cell body to receive input from other neurons (or to
also receive external signals in the case of sensory neurons). A neuron’s axon is a ﬁber
that carries the neuron’s output to other neurons (or to muscles or glands). A neuron’s
output consists of sequences of electrical pulses called action potentials that travel along
the axon. Action potentials are also called spikes, and a neuron is said to ﬁre when it
generates a spike. In models of neural networks it is common to use real numbers to
represent a neuron’s ﬁring rate, the average number of spikes per some unit of time.
A neuron’s axon can branch widely so that the neuron’s action potentials reach
many targets. The branching structure of a neuron’s axon is called the neuron’s axonal
arbor. Because the conduction of an action potential is an active process, not unlike the
burning of a fuse, when an action potential reaches an axonal branch point it “lights
up” action potentials on all of the outgoing branches (although propagation to a branch
can sometimes fail). As a result, the activity of a neuron with a large axonal arbor can
inﬂuence many target sites.


--- Page 401 ---

15.1. Neuroscience Basics
379
A synapse is a structure generally at the termination of an axon branch that mediates
the communication of one neuron to another. A synapse transmits information from
the presynaptic neuron’s axon to a dendrite or cell body of the postsynaptic neuron.
With a few exceptions, synapses release a chemical neurotransmitter upon the arrival
of an action potential from the presynaptic neuron. (The exceptions are cases of direct
electric coupling between neurons, but these will not concern us here.) Neurotransmitter
molecules released from the presynaptic side of the synapse di↵use across the synaptic
cleft, the very small space between the presynaptic ending and the postsynaptic neuron,
and then bind to receptors on the surface of the postsynaptic neuron to excite or inhibit
its spike-generating activity, or to modulate its behavior in other ways. A particular
neurotransmitter may bind to several di↵erent types of receptors, with each producing a
di↵erent e↵ect on the postsynaptic neuron. For example, there are at least ﬁve di↵erent
receptor types by which the neurotransmitter dopamine can a↵ect a postsynaptic neuron.
Many di↵erent chemicals have been identiﬁed as neurotransmitters in animal nervous
systems.
A neuron’s background activity is its level of activity, usually its ﬁring rate, when the
neuron does not appear to be driven by synaptic input related to the task of interest
to the experimenter, for example, when the neuron’s activity is not correlated with a
stimulus delivered to a subject as part of an experiment. Background activity can be
irregular due to input from the wider network, or due to noise within the neuron or its
synapses. Sometimes background activity is the result of dynamic processes intrinsic to
the neuron. A neuron’s phasic activity, in contrast to its background activity, consists of
bursts of spiking activity usually caused by synaptic input. Activity that varies slowly
and often in a graded manner, whether as background activity or not, is called a neuron’s
tonic activity.
The strength or e↵ectiveness by which the neurotransmitter released at a synapse
inﬂuences the postsynaptic neuron is the synapse’s eﬃcacy. One way a nervous system
can change through experience is through changes in synaptic eﬃcacies as a result of
combinations of the activities of the presynaptic and postsynaptic neurons, and sometimes
by the presence of a neuromodulator, which is a neurotransmitter having e↵ects other
than, or in addition to, direct fast excitation or inhibition.
Brains contain several di↵erent neuromodulation systems consisting of clusters of
neurons with widely branching axonal arbors, with each system using a di↵erent neuro-
transmitter. Neuromodulation can alter the function of neural circuits, mediate motivation,
arousal, attention, memory, mood, emotion, sleep, and body temperature. Important
here is that a neuromodulatory system can distribute something like a scalar signal, such
as a reinforcement signal, to alter the operation of synapses in widely distributed sites
critical for learning.
The ability of synaptic eﬃcacies to change is called synaptic plasticity. It is one of the
primary mechanisms responsible for learning. The parameters, or weights, adjusted by
learning algorithms correspond to synaptic eﬃcacies. As we detail below, modulation of
synaptic plasticity via the neuromodulator dopamine is a plausible mechanism for how
the brain might implement learning algorithms like many of those described in this book.


--- Page 402 ---

380
Chapter 15: Neuroscience
15.2
Reward Signals, Reinforcement Signals, Values,
and Prediction Errors
Links between neuroscience and computational reinforcement learning begin as parallels
between signals in the brain and signals playing prominent roles in reinforcement learning
theory and algorithms. In Chapter 3 we said that any problem of learning goal-directed
behavior can be reduced to the three signals representing actions, states, and rewards.
However, to explain links that have been made between neuroscience and reinforcement
learning, we have to be less abstract than this and consider other reinforcement learning
signals that correspond, in certain ways, to signals in the brain. In addition to reward
signals, these include reinforcement signals (which we argue are di↵erent from reward
signals), value signals, and signals conveying prediction errors. When we label a signal by
its function in this way, we are doing it in the context of reinforcement learning theory
in which the signal corresponds to a term in an equation or an algorithm. On the other
hand, when we refer to a signal in the brain, we mean a physiological event such as
a burst of action potentials or the secretion of a neurotransmitter. Labeling a neural
signal by its function, for example calling the phasic activity of a dopamine neuron a
reinforcement signal, means that the neural signal behaves like, and is conjectured to
function like, the corresponding theoretical signal.
Uncovering evidence for these correspondences involves many challenges.
Neural
activity related to reward processing can be found in nearly every part of the brain,
and it is diﬃcult to interpret results unambiguously because representations of di↵erent
reward-related signals tend to be highly correlated with one another. Experiments need to
be carefully designed to allow one type of reward-related signal to be distinguished with
any degree of certainty from others—or from an abundance of other signals not related to
reward processing. Despite these diﬃculties, many experiments have been conducted with
the aim of reconciling aspects of reinforcement learning theory and algorithms with neural
signals, and some compelling links have been established. To prepare for examining these
links, in the rest of this section we remind the reader of what various reward-related
signals mean according to reinforcement learning theory.
In our Comments on Terminology at the end of the previous chapter, we said that
Rt is like a reward signal in an animal’s brain and not an object or event in the
animal’s environment. In reinforcement learning, the reward signal (along with an agent’s
environment) deﬁnes the problem a reinforcement learning agent is trying to solve. In
this respect, Rt is like a signal in an animal’s brain that distributes primary reward to
sites throughout the brain. But it is unlikely that a unitary master reward signal like Rt
exists in an animal’s brain. It is best to think of Rt as an abstraction summarizing the
overall e↵ect of a multitude of neural signals generated by many systems in the brain
that assess the rewarding or punishing qualities of sensations and states.
Reinforcement signals in reinforcement learning are di↵erent from reward signals. The
function of a reinforcement signal is to direct the changes a learning algorithm makes in
an agent’s policy, value estimates, or environment models. For a TD method, for instance,
the reinforcement signal at time t is the TD error δt−1 = Rt + γV (St) −V (St−1).1 The
1As we mentioned in Section 6.1, δt in our notation is deﬁned to be Rt+1 + γV (St+1) −V (St), so δt


--- Page 403 ---

15.3. The Reward Prediction Error Hypothesis
381
reinforcement signal for some algorithms could be just the reward signal, but for most
of the algorithms we consider the reinforcement signal is the reward signal adjusted by
other information, such as the value estimates in TD errors.
Estimates of state values or of action values, that is, V or Q, specify what is good or
bad for the agent over the long run. They are predictions of the total reward an agent can
expect to accumulate over the future. Agents make good decisions by selecting actions
leading to states with the largest estimated state values, or by selecting actions with the
largest estimated action values.
Prediction errors measure discrepancies between expected and actual signals or sensa-
tions. Reward prediction errors (RPEs) speciﬁcally measure discrepancies between the
expected and the received reward signal, being positive when the reward signal is greater
than expected, and negative otherwise. TD errors like (6.5) are special kinds of RPEs
that signal discrepancies between current and earlier expectations of reward over the
long-term. When neuroscientists refer to RPEs they generally (though not always) mean
TD RPEs, which we simply call TD errors throughout this chapter. Also in this chapter,
a TD error is generally one that does not depend on actions, as opposed to TD errors
used in learning action-values by algorithms like Sarsa and Q-learning. This is because
the most well-known links to neuroscience are stated in terms of action-free TD errors,
but we do not mean to rule out possible similar links involving action-dependent TD
errors. (TD errors for predicting signals other than rewards are useful too, but that case
will not concern us here. See, for example, Modayil, White, and Sutton, 2014.)
One can ask many questions about links between neuroscience data and these theoretically-
deﬁned signals. Is an observed signal more like a reward signal, a value signal, a prediction
error, a reinforcement signal, or something altogether di↵erent? And if it is an error
signal, is it an RPE, a TD error, or a simpler error like the Rescorla–Wagner error (14.3)?
And if it is a TD error, does it depend on actions like the TD error of Q-learning or
Sarsa? As indicated above, probing the brain to answer questions like these is extremely
diﬃcult. But experimental evidence suggests that one neurotransmitter, speciﬁcally
the neurotransmitter dopamine, signals RPEs, and further, that the phasic activity of
dopamine-producing neurons in fact conveys TD errors (see Section 15.1 for a deﬁnition of
phasic activity). This evidence led to the reward prediction error hypothesis of dopamine
neuron activity, which we describe next.
15.3
The Reward Prediction Error Hypothesis
The reward prediction error hypothesis of dopamine neuron activity proposes that one
of the functions of the phasic activity of dopamine-producing neurons in mammals is to
deliver an error between an old and a new estimate of expected future reward to target
areas throughout the brain. This hypothesis (though not in these exact words) was
ﬁrst explicitly stated by Montague, Dayan, and Sejnowski (1996), who showed how the
TD error concept from reinforcement learning accounts for many features of the phasic
is not available until time t + 1. The TD error available at t is actually δt−1 = Rt + γV (St) −V (St−1).
Because we are thinking of time steps as very small, or even inﬁnitesimal, time intervals, one should not
attribute undue importance to this one-step time shift.


--- Page 404 ---

382
Chapter 15: Neuroscience
activity of dopamine neurons in mammals. The experiments that led to this hypothesis
were performed in the 1980s and early 1990s in the laboratory of neuroscientist Wolfram
Schultz. Section 15.5 describes these inﬂuential experiments, Section 15.6 explains how the
results of these experiments align with TD errors, and the Bibliographical and Historical
Remarks section at the end of this chapter includes a guide to the literature surrounding
the development of this inﬂuential hypothesis.
Montague et al. (1996) compared the TD errors of the TD model of classical conditioning
with the phasic activity of dopamine-producing neurons during classical conditioning
experiments. Recall from Section 14.2 that the TD model of classical conditioning is
basically the semi-gradient-descent TD(λ) algorithm with linear function approximation.
Montague et al. made several assumptions to set up this comparison. First, because a
TD error can be negative but neurons cannot have a negative ﬁring rate, they assumed
that the quantity corresponding to dopamine neuron activity is δt−1 + bt, where bt is the
background ﬁring rate of the neuron. A negative TD error corresponds to a drop in a
dopamine neuron’s ﬁring rate below its background rate.2
A second assumption was needed about the states visited in each classical conditioning
trial and how they are represented as inputs to the learning algorithm. This is the same
issue we discussed in Section 14.2.4 for the TD model. Montague et al. chose a complete
serial compound (CSC) representation as shown in the left column of Figure 14.1, but
where the sequence of short-duration internal signals continues until the onset of the US,
which here is the arrival of a non-zero reward signal. This representation allows the TD
error to mimic the fact that dopamine neuron activity not only predicts a future reward,
but that it is also sensitive to when after a predictive cue that reward is expected to
arrive. There has to be some way to keep track of the time between sensory cues and
the arrival of reward. If a stimulus initiates a sequence of internal signals that continues
after the stimulus ends, and if there is a di↵erent signal for each time step following the
stimulus, then each time step after the stimulus is represented by a distinct state. Thus,
the TD error, being state-dependent, can be sensitive to the timing of events within a
trial.
In simulated trials with these assumptions about background ﬁring rate and input
representation, TD errors of the TD model are remarkably similar to dopamine neuron
phasic activity. Previewing our description of details about these similarities in Section 15.5
below, the TD errors parallel the following features of dopamine neuron activity: (1) the
phasic response of a dopamine neuron only occurs when a rewarding event is unpredicted;
(2) early in learning, neutral cues that precede a reward do not cause substantial phasic
dopamine responses, but with continued learning these cues gain predictive value and
come to elicit phasic dopamine responses; (3) if an even earlier cue reliably precedes a
cue that has already acquired predictive value, the phasic dopamine response shifts to
the earlier cue, ceasing for the later cue; and (4) if after learning, the predicted rewarding
event is omitted, a dopamine neuron’s response decreases below its baseline level shortly
after the expected time of the rewarding event.
2In the literature relating TD errors to the activity of dopamine neurons, their δt is the same as our
δt−1 = Rt + γV (St) −V (St−1).


--- Page 405 ---

15.4. Dopamine
383
Although not every dopamine neuron monitored in the experiments of Schultz and
colleagues behaved in all of these ways, the striking correspondence between the ac-
tivities of most of the monitored neurons and TD errors lends strong support to the
reward prediction error hypothesis. There are situations, however, in which predictions
based on the hypothesis do not match what is observed in experiments. The choice
of input representation is critical to how closely TD errors match some of the details
of dopamine neuron activity, particularly details about the timing of dopamine neuron
responses. Di↵erent ideas, some of which we discuss below, have been proposed about
input representations and other features of TD learning to make the TD errors ﬁt the data
better, though the main parallels appear with the CSC representation that Montague et
al. used. Overall, the reward prediction error hypothesis has received wide acceptance
among neuroscientists studying reward-based learning, and it has proven to be remarkably
resilient in the face of accumulating results from neuroscience experiments.
To prepare for our description of the neuroscience experiments supporting the reward
prediction error hypothesis, and to provide some context so that the signiﬁcance of the
hypothesis can be appreciated, we next present some of what is known about dopamine,
the brain structures it inﬂuences, and how it is involved in reward-based learning.
15.4
Dopamine
Dopamine is produced as a neurotransmitter by neurons whose cell bodies lie mainly
in two clusters of neurons in the midbrain of mammals: the substantia nigra pars
compacta (SNpc) and the ventral tegmental area (VTA). Dopamine plays essential roles
in many processes in the mammalian brain. Prominent among these are motivation,
learning, action-selection, most forms of addiction, and the disorders schizophrenia and
Parkinson’s disease. Dopamine is called a neuromodulator because it performs many
functions other than direct fast excitation or inhibition of targeted neurons. Although
much remains unknown about dopamine’s functions and details of its cellular e↵ects, it is
clear that it is fundamental to reward processing in the mammalian brain. Dopamine
is not the only neuromodulator involved in reward processing, and its role in aversive
situations—punishment—remains controversial. Dopamine also can function di↵erently in
non-mammals. But no one doubts that dopamine is essential for reward-related processes
in mammals, including humans.
An early, traditional view is that dopamine neurons broadcast a reward signal to
multiple brain regions implicated in learning and motivation. This view followed from a
famous 1954 paper by James Olds and Peter Milner that described the e↵ects of electrical
stimulation on certain areas of a rat’s brain. They found that electrical stimulation to
particular regions acted as a very powerful reward in controlling the rat’s behavior: “...the
control exercised over the animal’s behavior by means of this reward is extreme, possibly
exceeding that exercised by any other reward previously used in animal experimentation”
(Olds and Milner, 1954). Later research revealed that the sites at which stimulation
was most e↵ective in producing this rewarding e↵ect excited dopamine pathways, either
directly or indirectly, that ordinarily are excited by natural rewarding stimuli. E↵ects
similar to these were also observed with human subjects. These observations strongly
suggested that dopamine neuron activity signals reward.


--- Page 406 ---

384
Chapter 15: Neuroscience
But if the reward prediction error hypothesis is correct—even if it accounts for only
some features of a dopamine neuron’s activity—this traditional view of dopamine neuron
activity is not entirely correct: phasic responses of dopamine neurons signal reward
prediction errors, not reward itself.
In reinforcement learning’s terms, a dopamine
neuron’s phasic response at a time t corresponds to δt−1 = Rt + γV (St) −V (St−1), not
to Rt.
Reinforcement learning theory and algorithms help reconcile the reward-prediction-
error view with the conventional notion that dopamine signals reward. In many of the
algorithms we discuss in this book, δ functions as a reinforcement signal, meaning that it
is the main driver of learning. For example, δ is the critical factor in the TD model of
classical conditioning, and δ is the reinforcement signal for learning both a value function
and a policy in an actor–critic architecture (Sections 13.5 and 15.7). Action-dependent
forms of δ are reinforcement signals for Q-learning and Sarsa. The reward signal Rt is
a crucial component of δt−1, but it is not the complete determinant of its reinforcing
e↵ect in these algorithms. The additional term γV (St) −V (St−1) is the higher-order
reinforcement part of δt−1, and even if reward occurs (Rt 6= 0), the TD error can be silent
if the reward is fully predicted (which is fully explained in Section 15.6 below).
A closer look at Olds’ and Milner’s 1954 paper, in fact, reveals that it is mainly
about the reinforcing e↵ect of electrical stimulation in an instrumental conditioning task.
Electrical stimulation not only energized the rats’ behavior—through dopamine’s e↵ect on
motivation—it also led to the rats quickly learning to stimulate themselves by pressing a
lever, which they would do frequently for long periods of time. The activity of dopamine
neurons triggered by electrical stimulation reinforced the rats’ lever pressing.
More recent experiments using optogenetic methods clinch the role of phasic responses
of dopamine neurons as reinforcement signals. These methods allow neuroscientists to
precisely control the activity of selected neuron types at a millisecond timescale in awake
behaving animals. Optogenetic methods introduce light-sensitive proteins into selected
neuron types so that these neurons can be activated or silenced by means of ﬂashes of
laser light. The ﬁrst experiment using optogenetic methods to study dopamine neurons
showed that optogenetic stimulation producing phasic activation of dopamine neurons
in mice was enough to condition the mice to prefer the side of a chamber where they
received this stimulation as compared to the chamber’s other side where they received
no, or lower-frequency, stimulation (Tsai et al. 2009). In another example, Steinberg
et al. (2013) used optogenetic activation of dopamine neurons to create artiﬁcial bursts
of dopamine neuron activity in rats at the times when rewarding stimuli were expected
but omitted—times when dopamine neuron activity normally pauses. With these pauses
replaced by artiﬁcial bursts, responding was sustained when it would ordinarily decrease
due to lack of reinforcement (in extinction trials), and learning was enabled when it would
ordinarily be blocked due to the reward being already predicted (the blocking paradigm;
Section 14.2.1).
Additional evidence for the reinforcing function of dopamine comes from optogenetic
experiments with fruit ﬂies, except in these animals dopamine’s e↵ect is the opposite of
its e↵ect in mammals: optically triggered bursts of dopamine neuron activity act just
like electric foot shock in reinforcing avoidance behavior, at least for the population


--- Page 407 ---

15.4. Dopamine
385
of dopamine neurons activated (Claridge-Chang et al. 2009). Although none of these
optogenetic experiments showed that phasic dopamine neuron activity is speciﬁcally
like a TD error, they convincingly demonstrated that phasic dopamine neuron activity
acts just like δ acts (or perhaps like minus δ acts in fruit ﬂies) as the reinforcement
signal in algorithms for both prediction (classical conditioning) and control (instrumental
conditioning).
Axonal arbor of a single neuron producing
dopamine as a neurotransmitter. These
axons make synaptic contacts with a huge
number of dendrites of neurons in targeted
brain areas.
Adapted from The Journal of Neuroscience,
Matsuda, Furuta, Nakamura, Hioki, Fujiyama,
Arai, and Kaneko, volume 29, 2009, page 451.
Dopamine neurons are particularly well suited
to broadcasting a reinforcement signal to many
areas of the brain. These neurons have huge
axonal arbors, each releasing dopamine at 100 to
1,000 times more synaptic sites than reached by
the axons of typical neurons. Shown to the right
is the axonal arbor of a single dopamine neuron
whose cell body is in the SNpc of a rat’s brain.
Each axon of a SNpc or VTA dopamine neuron
makes roughly 500,000 synaptic contacts on the
dendrites of neurons in targeted brain areas.
If dopamine neurons broadcast a reinforce-
ment signal like reinforcement learning’s δ, then
because this is a scalar signal, i.e., a single num-
ber, all dopamine neurons in both the SNpc
and VTA would be expected to activate more-
or-less identically so that they would act in near
synchrony to send the same signal to all of the
sites their axons target. Although it has been
a common belief that dopamine neurons do act
together like this, modern evidence is pointing
to the more complicated picture that di↵erent
subpopulations of dopamine neurons respond to
input di↵erently depending on the structures to
which they send their signals and the di↵erent
ways these signals act on their target structures. Dopamine has functions other than
signaling RPEs, and even for dopamine neurons that do signal RPEs, it can make sense
to send di↵erent RPEs to di↵erent structures depending on the roles these structures
play in producing reinforced behavior. This is beyond what we treat in any detail in this
book, but vector-valued RPE signals make sense from the perspective of reinforcement
learning when decisions can be decomposed into separate sub-decisions, or more generally,
as a way to address the structural version of the credit assignment problem: How do
you distribute credit for success (or blame for failure) of a decision among the many
component structures that could have been involved in producing it? We say a bit more
about this in Section 15.10 below.
The axons of most dopamine neurons make synaptic contact with neurons in the frontal
cortex and the basal ganglia, areas of the brain involved in voluntary movement, decision
making, learning, and cognitive functions such as planning. Because most ideas relating


--- Page 408 ---

386
Chapter 15: Neuroscience
dopamine to reinforcement learning focus on the basal ganglia, and the connections from
dopamine neurons are particularly dense there, we focus on the basal ganglia here. The
basal ganglia are a collection of neuron groups, or nuclei, lying at the base of the forebrain.
The main input structure of the basal ganglia is called the striatum. Essentially all of the
cerebral cortex, among other structures, provides input to the striatum. The activity of
cortical neurons conveys a wealth of information about sensory input, internal states, and
motor activity. The axons of cortical neurons make synaptic contacts on the dendrites of
the main input/output neurons of the striatum, called medium spiny neurons. Output
from the striatum loops back via other basal ganglia nuclei and the thalamus to frontal
areas of cortex, and to motor areas, making it possible for the striatum to inﬂuence
movement, abstract decision processes, and reward processing. Two main subdivisions
of the striatum are important for reinforcement learning: the dorsal striatum, primarily
implicated in inﬂuencing action selection, and the ventral striatum, thought to be critical
for di↵erent aspects of reward processing, including the assignment of a↵ective value to
sensations.
The dendrites of medium spiny neurons are covered with spines on whose tips the
axons of neurons in the cortex make synaptic contact. Also making synaptic contact with
these spines—in this case contacting the spine stems—are axons of dopamine neurons
(Figure 15.1). This arrangement brings together presynaptic activity of cortical neurons,
Figure 15.1: Spine of a striatal neuron showing input from both cortical and dopamine neurons.
Axons of cortical neurons inﬂuence striatal neurons via corticostriatal synapses releasing the
neurotransmitter glutamate at the tips of spines covering the dendrites of striatal neurons.
An axon of a VTA or SNpc dopamine neuron is shown passing by the spine (from the lower
right). “Dopamine varicosities” on this axon release dopamine at or near the spine stem, in an
arrangement that brings together presynaptic input from cortex, postsynaptic activity of the
striatal neuron, and dopamine, making it possible that several types of learning rules govern the
plasticity of corticostriatal synapses. Each axon of a dopamine neuron makes synaptic contact
with the stems of roughly 500,000 spines. Some of the complexity omitted from our discussion
is shown here by other neurotransmitter pathways and multiple receptor types, such as D1 an
D2 dopamine receptors by which dopamine can produce di↵erent e↵ects at spines and other
postsynaptic sites. From Journal of Neurophysiology, W. Schultz, vol. 80, 1998, page 10.


--- Page 409 ---

15.5. Experimental Support for the Reward Prediction Error Hypothesis
387
postsynaptic activity of medium spiny neurons, and input from dopamine neurons. What
actually occurs at these spines is complex and not completely understood. Figure 15.1
hints at the complexity by showing two types of receptors for dopamine, receptors for
glutamate—the neurotransmitter of the cortical inputs—and multiple ways that the
various signals can interact. But evidence is mounting that changes in the eﬃcacies of
the synapses on the pathway from the cortex to the striatum, which neuroscientists call
corticostriatal synapses, depend critically on appropriately-timed dopamine signals.
15.5
Experimental Support
for the Reward Prediction Error Hypothesis
Dopamine neurons respond with bursts of activity to intense, novel, or unexpected visual
and auditory stimuli that trigger eye and body movements, but very little of their activity is
related to the movements themselves. This is surprising because degeneration of dopamine
neurons is a cause of Parkinson’s disease, whose symptoms include motor disorders,
particularly deﬁcits in self-initiated movement. Motivated by the weak relationship
between dopamine neuron activity and stimulus-triggered eye and body movements,
Romo and Schultz (1990) and Schultz and Romo (1990) took the ﬁrst steps toward the
reward prediction error hypothesis by recording the activity of dopamine neurons and
muscle activity while monkeys moved their arms.
They trained two monkeys to reach from a resting hand position into a bin containing
a bit of apple, a piece of cookie, or a raisin, when the monkey saw and heard the bin’s
door open. The monkey could then grab and bring the food to its mouth. After a monkey
became good at this, it was trained on two additional tasks. The purpose of the ﬁrst
task was to see what dopamine neurons do when movements are self-initiated. The bin
was left open but covered from above so that the monkey could not see inside but could
reach in from below. No triggering stimuli were presented, and after the monkey reached
for and ate the food morsel, the experimenter usually (though not always), silently and
unseen by the monkey, replaced food in the bin by sticking it onto a rigid wire. Here too,
the activity of the dopamine neurons Romo and Schultz monitored was not related to the
monkey’s movements, but a large percentage of these neurons produced phasic responses
whenever the monkey ﬁrst touched a food morsel. These neurons did not respond when
the monkey touched just the wire or explored the bin when no food was there. This was
good evidence that the neurons were responding to the food and not to other aspects of
the task.
The purpose of Romo and Schultz’s second task was to see what happens when
movements are triggered by stimuli. This task used a di↵erent bin with a movable cover.
The sight and sound of the bin opening triggered reaching movements to the bin. In this
case, Romo and Schultz found that after some period of training, the dopamine neurons
no longer responded to the touch of the food but instead responded to the sight and sound
of the opening cover of the food bin. The phasic responses of these neurons had shifted
from the reward itself to stimuli predicting the availability of the reward. In a followup
study, Romo and Schultz found that most of the dopamine neurons whose activity they


--- Page 410 ---

388
Chapter 15: Neuroscience
monitored did not respond to the sight and sound of the bin opening outside the context
of the behavioral task. These observations suggested that the dopamine neurons were
responding neither to the initiation of a movement nor to the sensory properties of the
stimuli, but were rather signaling an expectation of reward.
Schultz’s group conducted many additional studies involving both SNpc and VTA
dopamine neurons. A particular series of experiments was inﬂuential in suggesting that
the phasic responses of dopamine neurons correspond to TD errors and not to simpler
errors like those in the Rescorla–Wagner model (14.3). In the ﬁrst of these experiments
(Ljungberg, Apicella, and Schultz, 1992), monkeys were trained to depress a lever after
a light was illuminated as a ‘trigger cue’ to obtain a drop of apple juice. As Romo
and Schultz had observed earlier, many dopamine neurons initially responded to the
reward—the drop of juice (Figure 15.2, top panel). But many of these neurons lost that
reward response as training continued and developed responses instead to the illumination
of the light that predicted the reward (Figure 15.2, middle panel). With continued
training, lever pressing became faster while the number of dopamine neurons responding
to the trigger cue decreased.
Following this study, the same monkeys were trained on a new task (Schultz, Apicella,
and Ljungberg, 1993). Here the monkeys faced two levers, each with a light above it.
Illuminating one of these lights was an ‘instruction cue’ indicating which of the two levers
Figure 15.2: The response of dopamine neurons shifts from initial responses to primary reward
to earlier predictive stimuli.
These are plots of the number of action potentials produced
by monitored dopamine neurons within small time intervals, averaged over all the monitored
dopamine neurons (ranging from 23 to 44 neurons for these data). Top: dopamine neurons are
activated by the unpredicted delivery of drop of apple juice. Middle: with learning, dopamine
neurons developed responses to the reward-predicting trigger cue and lost responsiveness to the
delivery of reward. Bottom: with the addition of an instruction cue preceding the trigger cue by
1 second, dopamine neurons shifted their responses from the trigger cue to the earlier instruction
cue. From Schultz et al. (1995), MIT Press.


--- Page 411 ---

15.5. Experimental Support for the Reward Prediction Error Hypothesis
389
Figure 15.3: The response of dopamine neurons drops
below baseline shortly after the time when an expected
reward fails to occur.
Top: dopamine neurons are
activated by the unpredicted delivery of a drop of
apple juice. Middle: dopamine neurons respond to a
conditioned stimulus (CS) that predicts reward and
do not respond to the reward itself. Bottom: when
the reward predicted by the CS fails to occur, the
activity of dopamine neurons drops below baseline
shortly after the time the reward is expected to occur.
At the top of each of these panels is shown the average
number of action potentials produced by monitored
dopamine neurons within small time intervals around
the indicated times. The raster plots below show the
activity patterns of the individual dopamine neurons
that were monitored; each dot represents an action
potential.
From Schultz, Dayan, and Montague, A
Neural Substrate of Prediction and Reward, Science,
vol. 275, issue 5306, pages 1593-1598, March 14, 1997.
Reprinted with permission from AAAS.
would produce a drop of apple juice.
In this task, the instruction cue pre-
ceded the trigger cue of the previ-
ous task by a ﬁxed interval of 1 sec-
ond. The monkeys learned to with-
hold reaching until seeing the trig-
ger cue, and dopamine neuron activ-
ity increased, but now the responses
of the monitored dopamine neurons
occurred almost exclusively to the
earlier instruction cue and not to
the trigger cue (Figure 15.2, bot-
tom panel).
Here again the num-
ber of dopamine neurons responding
to the instruction cue was much re-
duced when the task was well learned.
During learning across these tasks,
dopamine neuron activity shifted
from initially responding to the re-
ward to responding to the earlier
predictive stimuli, ﬁrst progressing
to the trigger stimulus then to the
still earlier instruction cue. As re-
sponding moved earlier in time it
disappeared from the later stimuli.
This shifting of responses to earlier
reward predictors, while losing re-
sponses to later predictors is a hall-
mark of TD learning (see, for exam-
ple, Figure 14.2).
The task just described revealed
another property of dopamine neu-
ron activity shared with TD learn-
ing. The monkeys sometimes pressed
the wrong key, that is, the key other
than the instructed one, and conse-
quently received no reward. In these
trials, many of the dopamine neu-
rons showed a sharp decrease in their
ﬁring rates below baseline shortly af-
ter the reward’s usual time of deliv-
ery, and this happened without the
availability of any external cue to
mark the usual time of reward de-
livery (Figure 15.3). Somehow the


--- Page 412 ---

390
Chapter 15: Neuroscience
monkeys were internally keeping track of the timing of the reward. (Response timing is
one area where the simplest version of TD learning needs to be modiﬁed to account for
some of the details of the timing of dopamine neuron responses. We consider this issue in
the following section.)
The observations from the studies described above led Schultz and his group to conclude
that dopamine neurons respond to unpredicted rewards, to the earliest predictors of
reward, and that dopamine neuron activity decreases below baseline if a reward, or a
predictor of reward, does not occur at its expected time. Researchers familiar with
reinforcement learning were quick to recognize that these results are strikingly similar
to how the TD error behaves as the reinforcement signal in a TD algorithm. The next
section explores this similarity by working through a speciﬁc example in detail.
15.6
TD Error/Dopamine Correspondence
This section explains the correspondence between the TD error δ and the phasic responses
of dopamine neurons observed in the experiments just described. We examine how δ
changes over the course of learning in a task something like the one described above
where a monkey ﬁrst sees an instruction cue and then a ﬁxed time later has to respond
correctly to a trigger cue in order to obtain reward. We use a simple idealized version of
this task, but we go into a lot more detail than is usual because we want to emphasize
the theoretical basis of the parallel between TD errors and dopamine neuron activity.
The ﬁrst simplifying assumption is that the agent has already learned the actions
required to obtain reward. Then its task is just to learn accurate predictions of future
reward for the sequence of states it experiences. This is then a prediction task, or
more technically, a policy-evaluation task: learning the value function for a ﬁxed policy
(Sections 4.1 and 6.1). The value function to be learned assigns to each state a value that
predicts the return that will follow that state if the agent selects actions according to the
given policy, where the return is the (possibly discounted) sum of all the future rewards.
This is unrealistic as a model of the monkey’s situation because the monkey would likely
learn these predictions at the same time that it is learning to act correctly (as would a
reinforcement learning algorithm that learns policies as well as value functions, such as
an actor–critic algorithm), but this scenario is simpler to describe than one in which a
policy and a value function are learned simultaneously.
Now imagine that the agent’s experience divides into multiple trials, in each of which
the same sequence of states repeats, with a distinct state occurring on each time step
during the trial. Further imagine that the return being predicted is limited to the return
over a trial, which makes a trial analogous to a reinforcement learning episode as we have
deﬁned it. In reality, of course, the returns being predicted are not conﬁned to single
trials, and the time interval between trials is an important factor in determining what an
animal learns. This is true for TD learning as well, but here we assume that returns do
not accumulate over multiple trials. Given this, then, a trial in experiments like those
conducted by Schultz and colleagues is equivalent to an episode of reinforcement learning.
(Though in this discussion, we will use the term trial instead of episode to relate better
to the experiments.)


--- Page 413 ---

15.6. TD Error/Dopamine Correspondence
391
As usual, we also need to make an assumption about how states are represented as
inputs to the learning algorithm, an assumption that inﬂuences how closely the TD error
corresponds to dopamine neuron activity. We discuss this issue later, but for now we
assume the same CSC representation used by Montague et al. (1996) in which there is a
separate internal stimulus for each state visited at each time step in a trial. This reduces
the process to the tabular case covered in the ﬁrst part of this book. Finally, we assume
that the agent uses TD(0) to learn a value function, V , stored in a lookup table initialized
to be zero for all the states. We also assume that this is a deterministic task and that
the discount factor, γ, is very nearly one so that we can ignore it.
Figure 15.4 shows the time courses of R, V , and δ at several stages of learning in this
policy-evaluation task. The time axes represent the time interval over which a sequence
of states is visited in a trial (where for clarity we omit showing individual states). The
reward signal is zero throughout each trial except when the agent reaches the rewarding
state, shown near the right end of the time line, when the reward signal becomes some
positive number, say R?. The goal of TD learning is to predict the return for each
state visited in a trial, which in this undiscounted case and given our assumption that
predictions are conﬁned to individual trials, is simply R? for each state.
R
RR
R
t
R
R
V
V
δ
δ
δ
early in
learning
learning
complete
omitted
R
regular predictors of     over this interval
R
R?
Figure 15.4: The behavior of the TD error δ during TD learning is consistent with features of
the phasic activation of dopamine neurons. (Here δ is the TD error available at time t, i.e., δt−1).
Top: a sequence of states, shown as an interval of regular predictors, is followed by a non-zero
reward R?. Early in learning: the initial value function, V , and initial δ, which at ﬁrst is equal
to R?. Learning complete: the value function accurately predicts future reward, δ is positive at
the earliest predictive state, and δ = 0 at the time of the non-zero reward. R? omitted: at the
time the predicted reward is omitted, δ becomes negative. See text for a complete explanation
of why this happens.


--- Page 414 ---

392
Chapter 15: Neuroscience
Preceding the rewarding state is a sequence of reward-predicting states, with the
earliest reward-predicting state shown near the left end of the time line. This is like
the state near the start of a trial, for example like the state marked by the instruction
cue in a trial of the monkey experiment of Schultz et al. (1993) described above. It is
the ﬁrst state in a trial that reliably predicts that trial’s reward. (Of course, in reality
states visited on preceding trials are even earlier reward-predicting states, but because
we are conﬁning predictions to individual trials, these do not qualify as predictors of this
trial’s reward. Below we give a more satisfactory, though more abstract, description of an
earliest reward-predicting state.) The latest reward-predicting state in a trial is the state
immediately preceding the trial’s rewarding state. This is the state near the far right end
of the time line in Figure 15.4. Note that the rewarding state of a trial does not predict
the return for that trial: the value of this state would come to predict the return over all
the following trials, which here we are assuming to be zero in this episodic formulation.
Figure 15.4 shows the ﬁrst-trial time courses of V and δ as the graphs labeled ‘early in
learning.’ Because the reward signal is zero throughout the trial except when the rewarding
state is reached, and all the V -values are zero, the TD error is also zero until it becomes
R? at the rewarding state. This follows because δt−1 = Rt + Vt −Vt−1 = Rt + 0 −0 = Rt,
which is zero until it equals R? when the reward occurs. Here Vt and Vt−1 are respectively
the estimated values of the states visited at times t and t −1 in a trial. The TD error at
this stage of learning is analogous to a dopamine neuron responding to an unpredicted
reward (e.g., a drop of apple juice) at the start of training.
Throughout this ﬁrst trial and all successive trials, TD(0) updates occur at each
state transition as described in Chapter 6. This successively increases the values of the
reward-predicting states, with the increases spreading backwards from the rewarding
state, until the values converge to the correct return predictions. In this case (because
we are assuming no discounting) the correct predictions are equal to R? for all the
reward-predicting states. This can be seen in Figure 15.4 as the graph of V labeled
‘learning complete’ where the values of all the states from the earliest to the latest
reward-predicting states all equal R?. The values of the states preceding the earliest
reward-predicting state remain low (which Figure 15.4 shows as zero) because they are
not reliable predictors of reward.
When learning is complete, that is, when V attains its correct values, the TD errors
associated with transitions from any reward-predicting state are zero because the predic-
tions are now accurate. This is because for a transition from a reward-predicting state to
another reward-predicting state, we have δt−1 = Rt + Vt −Vt−1 = 0 + R? −R? = 0, and
for the transition from the latest reward-predicting state to the rewarding state, we have
δt−1 = Rt +Vt −Vt−1 = R? +0−R? = 0. On the other hand, the TD error on a transition
from any state to the earliest reward-predicting state is positive because of the mismatch
between this state’s low value and the larger value of the following reward-predicting
state. Indeed, if the value of a state preceding the earliest reward-predicting state were
zero, then after the transition to the earliest reward-predicting state, we would have
that δt−1 = Rt + Vt −Vt−1 = 0 + R? −0 = R?. The ‘learning complete’ graph of δ in
Figure 15.4 shows this positive value at the earliest reward-predicting state, and zeros
everywhere else.


--- Page 415 ---

15.6. TD Error/Dopamine Correspondence
393
The positive TD error upon transitioning to the earliest reward-predicting state is
analogous to the persistence of dopamine responses to the earliest stimuli predicting
reward. By the same token, when learning is complete, a transition from the latest
reward-predicting state to the rewarding state produces a zero TD error because the
latest reward-predicting state’s value, being correct, cancels the reward. This parallels the
observation that fewer dopamine neurons generate a phasic response to a fully predicted
reward than to an unpredicted reward.
After learning, if the reward is suddenly omitted, the TD error goes negative at the
usual time of reward because the value of the latest reward-predicting state is then too
high: δt−1 = Rt + Vt −Vt−1 = 0 + 0 −R? = −R?, as shown at the right end of the ‘R
omitted’ graph of δ in Figure 15.4. This is like dopamine neuron activity decreasing
below baseline at the time an expected reward is omitted as seen in the experiment of
Schultz et al. (1993) described above and shown in Figure 15.3.
The idea of an earliest reward-predicting state deserves more attention. In the scenario
described above, because experience is divided into trials, and we assumed that predictions
are conﬁned to individual trials, the earliest reward-predicting state is always the ﬁrst
state of a trial. Clearly this is artiﬁcial. A more general way to think of an earliest
reward-predicting state is that it is an unpredicted predictor of reward, and there can
be many such states. In an animal’s life, many di↵erent states may precede an earliest
reward-predicting state. However, because these states are more often followed by other
states that do not predict reward, their reward-predicting powers, that is, their values,
remain low. A TD algorithm, if operating throughout the animal’s life, would update the
values of these states too, but the updates would not consistently accumulate because, by
assumption, none of these states reliably precedes an earliest reward-predicting state. If
any of them did, they would be reward-predicting states as well. This might explain why
with overtraining, dopamine responses decrease to even the earliest reward-predicting
stimulus in a trial. With overtraining one would expect that even a formerly-unpredicted
predictor state would become predicted by stimuli associated with earlier states: the
animal’s interaction with its environment both inside and outside of an experimental
task would become commonplace. Upon breaking this routine with the introduction of a
new task, however, one would see TD errors reappear, as indeed is observed in dopamine
neuron activity.
The example described above explains why the TD error shares key features with
the phasic activity of dopamine neurons when the animal is learning in a task similar
to the idealized task of our example. But not every property of the phasic activity of
dopamine neurons coincides so neatly with properties of δ. One of the most troubling
discrepancies involves what happens when a reward occurs earlier than expected. We
have seen that the omission of an expected reward produces a negative prediction error
at the reward’s expected time, which corresponds to the activity of dopamine neurons
decreasing below baseline when this happens. If the reward arrives later than expected,
it is then an unexpected reward and generates a positive prediction error. This happens
with both TD errors and dopamine neuron responses. But when reward arrives earlier
than expected, dopamine neurons do not do what the TD error does—at least with the
CSC representation used by Montague et al. (1996) and by us in our example. Dopamine


--- Page 416 ---

394
Chapter 15: Neuroscience
neurons do respond to the early reward, which is consistent with a positive TD error
because the reward is not predicted to occur then. However, at the later time when the
reward is expected but omitted, the TD error is negative whereas, in contrast to this
prediction, dopamine neuron activity does not drop below baseline in the way the TD
model predicts (Hollerman and Schultz, 1998). Something more complicated is going on
in the animal’s brain than simply TD learning with a CSC representation.
Some of the mismatches between the TD error and dopamine neuron activity can
be addressed by selecting suitable parameter values for the TD algorithm and by using
stimulus representations other than the CSC representation. For instance, to address
the early-reward mismatch just described, Suri and Schultz (1999) proposed a CSC
representation in which the sequences of internal signals initiated by earlier stimuli
are cancelled by the occurrence of a reward.
Another proposal by Daw, Courville,
and Touretzky (2006) is that the brain’s TD system uses representations produced by
statistical modeling carried out in sensory cortex rather than simpler representations
based on raw sensory input. Ludvig, Sutton, and Kehoe (2008) found that TD learning
with a microstimulus (MS) representation (Figure 14.1) ﬁts the activity of dopamine
neurons in the early-reward and other situations better than when a CSC representation
is used. Pan, Schmidt, Wickens, and Hyland (2005) found that even with the CSC
representation, prolonged eligibility traces improve the ﬁt of the TD error to some aspects
of dopamine neuron activity. In general, many ﬁne details of TD-error behavior depend
on subtle interactions between eligibility traces, discounting, and stimulus representations.
Findings like these elaborate and reﬁne the reward prediction error hypothesis without
refuting its core claim that the phasic activity of dopamine neurons is well characterized
as signaling TD errors.
On the other hand, there are other discrepancies between the TD theory and exper-
imental data that are not so easily accommodated by selecting parameter values and
stimulus representations (we mention some of these discrepancies in the Bibliographical
and Historical Remarks section at the end of this chapter), and more mismatches are
likely to be discovered as neuroscientists conduct ever more reﬁned experiments. But the
reward prediction error hypothesis has been functioning very e↵ectively as a catalyst for
improving our understanding of how the brain’s reward system works. Intricate experi-
ments have been designed to validate or refute predictions derived from the hypothesis,
and experimental results have, in turn, led to reﬁnement and elaboration of the TD
error/dopamine hypothesis.
A remarkable aspect of these developments is that the reinforcement learning algo-
rithms and theory that connect so well with properties of the dopamine system were
developed from a computational perspective in total absence of any knowledge about the
relevant properties of dopamine neurons—remember, TD learning and its connections
to optimal control and dynamic programming were developed many years before any of
the experiments were conducted that revealed the TD-like nature of dopamine neuron
activity. This unplanned correspondence, despite not being perfect, suggests that the TD
error/dopamine parallel captures something signiﬁcant about brain reward processes.
In addition to accounting for many features of the phasic activity of dopamine neurons,
the reward prediction error hypothesis links neuroscience to other aspects of reinforcement


--- Page 417 ---

15.7. Neural Actor–Critic
395
learning, in particular, to learning algorithms that use TD errors as reinforcement signals.
Neuroscience is still far from reaching complete understanding of the circuits, molecular
mechanisms, and functions of the phasic activity of dopamine neurons, but evidence
supporting the reward prediction error hypothesis, along with evidence that phasic
dopamine responses are reinforcement signals for learning, suggest that the brain might
implement something like an actor–critic algorithm in which TD errors play critical roles.
Other reinforcement learning algorithms are plausible candidates too, but actor–critic
algorithms ﬁt the anatomy and physiology of the mammalian brain particularly well, as
we describe in the following two sections.
15.7
Neural Actor–Critic
Actor–critic algorithms learn both policies and value functions.
The ‘actor’ is the
component that learns policies, and the ‘critic’ is the component that learns about
whatever policy is currently being followed by the actor in order to ‘criticize’ the actor’s
action choices. The critic uses a TD algorithm to learn the state-value function for the
actor’s current policy. The value function allows the critic to critique the actor’s action
choices by sending TD errors, δ, to the actor. A positive δ means that the action was
‘good’ because it led to a state with a better-than-expected value; a negative δ means
that the action was ‘bad’ because it led to a state with a worse-than-expected value.
Based on these critiques, the actor continually updates its policy.
Two distinctive features of actor–critic algorithms are responsible for thinking that the
brain might implement an algorithm like this. First, the two components of an actor–critic
algorithm—the actor and the critic—suggest that two parts of the striatum—the dorsal
and ventral subdivisions (Section 15.4), both critical for reward-based learning—may
function respectively something like an actor and a critic. A second property of actor–
critic algorithms that suggests a brain implementation is that the TD error has the dual
role of being the reinforcement signal for both the actor and the critic, though it has a
di↵erent inﬂuence on learning in each of these components. This ﬁts well with several
properties of the neural circuitry: axons of dopamine neurons target both the dorsal
and ventral subdivisions of the striatum; dopamine appears to be critical for modulating
synaptic plasticity in both structures; and how a neuromodulator such as dopamine
acts on a target structure depends on properties of the target structure and not just on
properties of the neuromodulator.
Section 13.5 presents actor–critic algorithms as policy gradient methods, but the actor–
critic algorithm of Barto, Sutton, and Anderson (1983) was simpler and was presented as
an artiﬁcial neural network (ANN). Here we describe an ANN implementation something
like that of Barto et al., and we follow Takahashi, Schoenbaum, and Niv (2008) in giving
a schematic proposal for how this ANN might be implemented by real neural networks in
the brain. We postpone discussion of the actor and critic learning rules until Section 15.8,
where we present them as special cases of the policy-gradient formulation and discuss
what they suggest about how dopamine might modulate synaptic plasticity.


--- Page 418 ---

396
Chapter 15: Neuroscience
Figure 15.5a shows an implementation of an actor–critic algorithm as an ANN with
component networks implementing the actor and the critic. The critic consists of a single
neuron-like unit, V , whose output activity represents state values, and a component
shown as the diamond labeled TD that computes TD errors by combining V ’s output
with reward signals and with previous state values (as suggested by the loop from the
TD diamond to itself). The actor network has a single layer of k actor units labeled Ai,
i = 1, . . . , k. The output of each actor unit is a component of a k-dimensional action
vector. An alternative is that there are k separate actions, one commanded by each actor
unit, that compete with one another to be executed, but here we will think of the entire
A-vector as an action.
Reward
Actor
TD
. 
. 
.
. 
. 
.
Critic
. 
. 
.
δ 
Actions
States/Stimuli
TD error
Environment
Actor
VTA
SNc
S2
S1
Sn
. 
. 
.
. 
. 
.
Critic
. 
. 
.
S1
Sn
S2
Actions
States/Stimuli
Dopamine
striatum
Ventral
Dorsal striatum
Cortex (multiple areas)
Environment
Reward
φ1
φ2
φn
φ1
φ2
φn
A1
A2
A3
Ak
V
δ
(a)
(b)
x1
x2
xn
x1
x2
xn
Figure 15.5: Actor–critic ANN and a hypothetical neural implementation. a) Actor–critic
algorithm as an ANN. The actor adjusts a policy based on the TD error δ it receives from the
critic; the critic adjusts state-value parameters using the same δ. The critic produces a TD error
from the reward signal, R, and the current change in its estimate of state values. The actor does
not have direct access to the reward signal, and the critic does not have direct access to the
action. b) Hypothetical neural implementation of an actor–critic algorithm. The actor and the
value-learning part of the critic are respectively placed in the dorsal and ventral subdivisions
of the striatum. The TD error is transmitted by dopamine neurons located in the VTA and
SNpc to modulate changes in synaptic eﬃcacies of input from cortical areas to the ventral and
dorsal striatum. Adapted from Frontiers in Neuroscience, vol. 2(1), 2008, Y. Takahashi, G.
Schoenbaum, and Y. Niv, Silencing the critics: Understanding the e↵ects of cocaine sensitization
on dorsolateral and ventral striatum in the context of an Actor/Critic model.


--- Page 419 ---

15.7. Neural Actor–Critic
397
Both the critic and actor networks receive input consisting of multiple features repre-
senting the state of the agent’s environment. (Recall from Chapter 1 that the environment
of a reinforcement learning agent includes components both inside and outside of the
‘organism’ containing the agent.) The ﬁgure shows these features as the circles labeled
x1, x2, . . . , xn, shown twice just to keep the ﬁgure simple. A weight representing the
eﬃcacy of a synapse is associated with each connection from each feature xi to the
critic unit, V , and to each of the action units, Ai. The weights in the critic network
parameterize the value function, and the weights in the actor network parameterize the
policy. The networks learn as these weights change according to the critic and actor
learning rules that we describe in the following section.
The TD error produced by circuitry in the critic is the reinforcement signal for changing
the weights in both the critic and the actor networks. This is shown in Figure 15.5a by
the line labeled ‘TD error δ’ extending across all of the connections in the critic and
actor networks. This aspect of the network implementation, together with the reward
prediction error hypothesis and the fact that the activity of dopamine neurons is so
widely distributed by the extensive axonal arbors of these neurons, suggests that an
actor–critic network something like this may not be too farfetched as a hypothesis about
how reward-related learning might happen in the brain.
Figure 15.5b suggests—very schematically—how the ANN on the ﬁgure’s left might
map onto structures in the brain according to the hypothesis of Takahashi et al. (2008).
The hypothesis puts the actor and the value-learning part of the critic respectively in the
dorsal and ventral subdivisions of the striatum, the input structure of the basal ganglia.
Recall from Section 15.4 that the dorsal striatum is primarily implicated in inﬂuencing
action selection, and the ventral striatum is thought to be critical for di↵erent aspects of
reward processing, including the assignment of a↵ective value to sensations. The cerebral
cortex, along with other structures, sends input to the striatum conveying information
about stimuli, internal states, and motor activity.
In this hypothetical actor–critic brain implementation, the ventral striatum sends value
information to the VTA and SNpc, where dopamine neurons in these nuclei combine it
with information about reward to generate activity corresponding to TD errors (though
exactly how dopaminergic neurons calculate these errors is not yet understood). The ‘TD
error δ’ line in Figure 15.5a becomes the line labeled ‘Dopamine’ in Figure 15.5b, which
represents the widely branching axons of dopamine neurons whose cell bodies are in the
VTA and SNpc. Referring back to Figure 15.1, these axons make synaptic contact with
the spines on the dendrites of medium spiny neurons, the main input/output neurons of
both the dorsal and ventral divisions of the striatum. Axons of the cortical neurons that
send input to the striatum make synaptic contact on the tips of these spines. According
to the hypothesis, it is at these spines where changes in the eﬃcacies of the synapses
from cortical regions to the striatum are governed by learning rules that critically depend
on a reinforcement signal supplied by dopamine.
An important implication of the hypothesis illustrated in Figure 15.5b is that the
dopamine signal is not the ‘master’ reward signal like the scalar Rt of reinforcement
learning. In fact, the hypothesis implies that one should not necessarily be able to
probe the brain and record any signal like Rt in the activity of any single neuron.


--- Page 420 ---

398
Chapter 15: Neuroscience
Many interconnected neural systems generate reward-related information, with di↵erent
structures being recruited depending on di↵erent types of rewards. Dopamine neurons
receive information from many di↵erent brain areas, so the input to the SNpc and
VTA labeled ‘Reward’ in Figure 15.5b should be thought of as vector of reward-related
information arriving to neurons in these nuclei along multiple input channels. What the
theoretical scalar reward signal Rt might correspond to, then, is the net contribution of
all reward-related information to dopamine neuron activity. It is the result of a pattern
of activity across many neurons in di↵erent areas of the brain.
Although the actor–critic neural implementation illustrated in Figure 15.5b may be
correct on some counts, it clearly needs to be reﬁned, extended, and modiﬁed to qualify
as a full-ﬂedged model of the function of the phasic activity of dopamine neurons. The
Historical and Bibliographic Remarks section at the end of this chapter cites publications
that discuss in more detail both empirical support for this hypothesis and places where it
falls short. We now look in detail at what the actor and critic learning algorithms suggest
about the rules governing changes in synaptic eﬃcacies of corticostriatal synapses.
15.8
Actor and Critic Learning Rules
If the brain does implement something like the actor–critic algorithm—and assuming
populations of dopamine neurons broadcast a common reinforcement signal to the corti-
costriatal synapses of both the dorsal and ventral striatum as illustrated in Figure 15.5b
(which is likely an oversimpliﬁcation as we mentioned above)—then this reinforcement
signal a↵ects the synapses of these two structures in di↵erent ways. The learning rules for
the critic and the actor use the same reinforcement signal, the TD error δ, but its e↵ect
on learning is di↵erent for these two components. The TD error (combined with eligibility
traces) tells the actor how to update action probabilities in order to reach higher-valued
states. Learning by the actor is like instrumental conditioning using a Law-of-E↵ect-type
learning rule (Section 1.7): the actor works to keep δ as positive as possible. On the
other hand, the TD error (when combined with eligibility traces) tells the critic the
direction and magnitude in which to change the parameters of the value function in order
to improve its predictive accuracy. The critic works to reduce δ’s magnitude to be as
close to zero as possible using a learning rule like the TD model of classical conditioning
(Section 14.2). The di↵erence between the critic and actor learning rules is relatively
simple, but this di↵erence has a profound e↵ect on learning and is essential to how the
actor–critic algorithm works. The di↵erence lies solely in the eligibility traces each type
of learning rule uses.
More than one set of learning rules can be used in actor–critic neural networks like
those in Figure 15.5b but, to be speciﬁc, here we focus on the actor–critic algorithm for
continuing problems with eligibility traces presented in Section 13.6. On each transition
from state St to state St+1, taking action At and receiving reward Rt+1, that algorithm
computes the TD error (δ) and then updates the eligibility trace vectors (zw
t and z✓
t ) and


--- Page 421 ---

15.8. Actor and Critic Learning Rules
399
the parameters for the critic and actor (w and ✓), according to
δt = Rt+1 + γ ˆv(St+1,w) −ˆv(St,w),
zw
t = γλwzw
t−1 + rˆv(St,w),
z✓
t = γλ✓z✓
t−1 + r ln ⇡(At|St, ✓),
w  w + ↵wδtzw
t ,
✓ ✓+ ↵✓δz✓
t ,
where γ 2 [0, 1) is a discount-rate parameter, λw 2 [0, 1] and λ✓2 [0, 1] are bootstrapping
parameters for the critic and the actor respectively, and ↵w > 0 and ↵✓> 0 are analogous
step-size parameters.
Think of the approximate value function ˆv as the output of a single linear neuron-like
unit, called the critic unit and labeled V in Figure 15.5a. Then the value function is a
linear function of the feature-vector representation of state s, x(s) = (x1(s), . . . , xn(s))>,
parameterized by a weight vector w = (w1, . . . , wn)>:
ˆv(s,w) = w>x(s).
(15.1)
Each xi(s) is like the presynaptic signal to a neuron’s synapse whose eﬃcacy is wi. The
weights of the critic are incremented according to the rule above by ↵wδtzw
t , where the
reinforcement signal, δt, corresponds to a dopamine signal being broadcast to all of the
critic unit’s synapses. The eligibility trace vector, zw
t , for the critic unit is a trace (average
of recent values) of rˆv(St,w). Because ˆv(s,w) is linear in the weights, rˆv(St,w) = x(St).
In neural terms, this means that each synapse has its own eligibility trace, which is
one component of the vector zw
t . A synapse’s eligibility trace accumulates according to
the level of activity arriving at that synapse, that is, the level of presynaptic activity,
represented here by the component of the feature vector x(St) arriving at that synapse.
The trace otherwise decays toward zero at a rate governed by the fraction λw. A synapse
is eligible for modiﬁcation as long as its eligibility trace is non-zero. How the synapse’s
eﬃcacy is actually modiﬁed depends on the reinforcement signals that arrive while the
synapse is eligible. We call eligibility traces like these of the critic unit’s synapses non-
contingent eligibility traces because they only depend on presynaptic activity and are not
contingent in any way on postsynaptic activity.
The non-contingent eligibility traces of the critic unit’s synapses mean that the critic
unit’s learning rule is essentially the TD model of classical conditioning described in
Section 14.2. With the deﬁnition we have given above of the critic unit and its learning
rule, the critic in Figure 15.5a is the same as the critic in the ANN actor–critic of Barto
et al. (1983). Clearly, a critic like this consisting of just one linear neuron-like unit is the
simplest starting point; this critic unit is a proxy for a more complicated neural network
able to learn value functions of greater complexity.
The actor in Figure 15.5a is a one-layer network of k neuron-like actor units, each
receiving at time t the same feature vector, x(St), that the critic unit receives. Each
actor unit j, j = 1, . . . , k, has its own weight vector, ✓j, but because the actor units are
all identical, we describe just one of the units and omit the subscript. One way for these


--- Page 422 ---

400
Chapter 15: Neuroscience
units to follow the actor–critic algorithm given in the equations above is for each to be a
Bernoulli-logistic unit. This means that the output of each actor unit at each time is
a random variable, At, taking value 0 or 1. Think of value 1 as the neuron ﬁring, that
is, emitting an action potential. The weighted sum, ✓>x(St), of a unit’s input vector
determines the unit’s action probabilities via the exponential soft-max distribution (13.2),
which for two actions is the logistic function:
⇡(1|s, ✓) = 1 −⇡(0|s, ✓) =
1
1 + exp(−✓>x(s)).
(15.2)
The weights of each actor unit are incremented, as above, by: ✓ ✓+ ↵✓δtz✓
t , where
δ again corresponds to the dopamine signal: the same reinforcement signal that is sent to
all the critic unit’s synapses. Figure 15.5a shows δt being broadcast to all the synapses
of all the actor units (which makes this actor network a team of reinforcement learning
agents, something we discuss in Section 15.10 below). The actor eligibility trace vector
z✓
t is a trace (average of recent values) of r ln ⇡(At|St, ✓). To understand this eligibility
trace refer to Exercise 13.5, which deﬁnes this kind of unit and asks you to give a learning
rule for it. That exercise asked you to express r ln ⇡(a|s, ✓) in terms of a, x(s), and
⇡(a|s, ✓) (for arbitrary state s and action a) by calculating the gradient. For the action
and state actually occurring at time t, the answer is
r ln ⇡(At|St, ✓) =
#
At −⇡(1|St, ✓)
$
x(St).
(15.3)
Unlike the non-contingent eligibility trace of a critic synapse that only accumulates
the presynaptic activity x(St), the eligibility trace of an actor unit’s synapse in addition
depends on the activity of the actor unit itself. We call this a contingent eligibility
trace because it is contingent on this postsynaptic activity. The eligibility trace at each
synapse continually decays, but increments or decrements depending on the activity of
the presynaptic neuron and whether or not the postsynaptic neuron ﬁres. The factor
At −⇡(1|St, ✓) in (15.3) is positive when At = 1 and negative otherwise. The postsynaptic
contingency in the eligibility traces of actor units is the only di↵erence between the critic
and actor learning rules. By keeping information about what actions were taken in
what states, contingent eligibility traces allow credit for reward (positive δ), or blame for
punishment (negative δ), to be apportioned among the policy parameters (the eﬃcacies
of the actor units’ synapses) according to the contributions these parameters made to the
units’ outputs that could have inﬂuenced later values of δ. Contingent eligibility traces
mark the synapses as to how they should be modiﬁed to alter the units’ future responses
to favor positive values of δ.
What do the critic and actor learning rules suggest about how eﬃcacies of corticostriatal
synapses change? Both learning rules are related to Donald Hebb’s classic proposal that
whenever a presynaptic signal participates in activating the postsynaptic neuron, the
synapse’s eﬃcacy increases (Hebb, 1949). The critic and actor learning rules share with
Hebb’s proposal the idea that changes in a synapse’s eﬃcacy depend on the interaction
of several factors. In the critic learning rule the interaction is between the reinforcement
signal δ and eligibility traces that depend only on presynaptic signals. Neuroscientists
call this a two-factor learning rule because the interaction is between two signals or


--- Page 423 ---

15.8. Actor and Critic Learning Rules
401
quantities. The actor learning rule, on the other hand, is a three-factor learning rule
because, in addition to depending on δ, its eligibility traces depend on both presynaptic
and postsynaptic activity. Unlike Hebb’s proposal, however, the relative timing of the
factors is critical to how synaptic eﬃcacies change, with eligibility traces intervening to
allow the reinforcement signal to a↵ect synapses that were active in the recent past.
Some subtleties about signal timing for the actor and critic learning rules deserve closer
attention. In deﬁning the neuron-like actor and critic units, we ignored the small amount
of time it takes synaptic input to e↵ect the ﬁring of a real neuron. When an action
potential from the presynaptic neuron arrives at a synapse, neurotransmitter molecules
are released that di↵use across the synaptic cleft to the postsynaptic neuron, where
they bind to receptors on the postsynaptic neuron’s surface; this activates molecular
machinery that causes the postsynaptic neuron to ﬁre (or to inhibit its ﬁring in the case of
inhibitory synaptic input). This process can take several tens of milliseconds. According
to (15.1) and (15.2), though, the input to a critic and actor unit instantaneously produces
the unit’s output. Ignoring activation time like this is common in abstract models of
Hebbian-style plasticity in which synaptic eﬃcacies change according to a simple product
of simultaneous pre- and postsynaptic activity. More realistic models must take activation
time into account.
Activation time is especially important for a more realistic actor unit because it
inﬂuences how contingent eligibility traces have to work in order to properly apportion
credit for reinforcement to the appropriate synapses. The expression
#
At−⇡(1|St, ✓)
$
x(St)
deﬁning contingent eligibility traces for the actor unit’s learning rule given above includes
the postsynaptic factor
#
At −⇡(1|St, ✓)
$
and the presynaptic factor x(St). This works
because by ignoring activation time, the presynaptic activity x(St) participates in causing
the postsynaptic activity appearing in
#
At−⇡(1|St, ✓)
$
. To assign credit for reinforcement
correctly, the presynaptic factor deﬁning the eligibility trace must be a cause of the
postsynaptic factor that also deﬁnes the trace. Contingent eligibility traces for a more
realistic actor unit would have to take activation time into account. (Activation time
should not be confused with the time required for a neuron to receive a reinforcement
signal inﬂuenced by that neuron’s activity. The function of eligibility traces is to span
this time interval which is generally much longer than the activation time. We discuss
this further in the following section.)
There are hints from neuroscience for how this process might work in the brain.
Neuroscientists have discovered a form of Hebbian plasticity called spike-timing-dependent
plasticity (STDP) that lends plausibility to the existence of actor-like synaptic plasticity
in the brain. STDP is a Hebbian-style plasticity, but changes in a synapse’s eﬃcacy
depend on the relative timing of presynaptic and postsynaptic action potentials. The
dependence can take di↵erent forms, but in the one most studied, a synapse increases in
strength if spikes incoming via that synapse arrive shortly before the postsynaptic neuron
ﬁres. If the timing relation is reversed, with a presynaptic spike arriving shortly after the
postsynaptic neuron ﬁres, then the strength of the synapse decreases. STDP is a type of
Hebbian plasticity that takes the activation time of a neuron into account, which is one
of the ingredients needed for actor-like learning.


--- Page 424 ---

402
Chapter 15: Neuroscience
The discovery of STDP has led neuroscientists to investigate the possibility of a three-
factor form of STDP in which neuromodulatory input must follow appropriately-timed
pre- and postsynaptic spikes. This form of synaptic plasticity, called reward-modulated
STDP, is much like the actor learning rule discussed here. Synaptic changes that would
be produced by regular STDP only occur if there is neuromodulatory input within a time
window after a presynaptic spike is closely followed by a postsynaptic spike. Evidence
is accumulating that reward-modulated STDP occurs at the spines of medium spiny
neurons of the dorsal striatum, with dopamine providing the neuromodulatory factor—
the sites where actor learning takes place in the hypothetical neural implementation of
an actor–critic algorithm illustrated in Figure 15.5b. Experiments have demonstrated
reward-modulated STDP in which lasting changes in the eﬃcacies of corticostriatal
synapses occur only if a neuromodulatory pulse arrives within a time window that can
last up to 10 seconds after a presynaptic spike is closely followed by a postsynaptic
spike (Yagishita et al. 2014). Although the evidence is indirect, these experiments point
to the existence of contingent eligibility traces having prolonged time courses. The
molecular mechanisms producing these traces, as well as the much shorter traces that
likely underly STDP, are not yet understood, but research focusing on time-dependent
and neuromodulator-dependent synaptic plasticity is continuing.
The neuron-like actor unit that we have described here, with its Law-of-E↵ect-style
learning rule, appeared in somewhat simpler form in the actor–critic network of Barto et
al. (1983). That network was inspired by the “hedonistic neuron” hypothesis proposed
by physiologist A. H. Klopf (1972, 1982). Not all the details of Klopf’s hypothesis are
consistent with what has been learned about synaptic plasticity, but the discovery of
STDP and the growing evidence for a reward-modulated form of STDP suggest that
Klopf’s ideas may not have been far o↵the mark. We discuss Klopf’s hedonistic neuron
hypothesis next.
15.9
Hedonistic Neurons
In his hedonistic neuron hypothesis, Klopf (1972, 1982) conjectured that individual
neurons seek to maximize the di↵erence between synaptic input treated as rewarding
and synaptic input treated as punishing by adjusting the eﬃcacies of their synapses
on the basis of rewarding or punishing consequences of their own action potentials. In
other words, individual neurons can be trained with response-contingent reinforcement
like an animal can be trained in an instrumental conditioning task. His hypothesis
included the idea that rewards and punishments are conveyed to a neuron via the same
synaptic input that excites or inhibits the neuron’s spike-generating activity. (Had Klopf
known what we know today about neuromodulatory systems, he might have assigned the
reinforcing role to neuromodulatory input, but he wanted to avoid any centralized source
of training information.) Synaptically-local traces of past pre- and postsynaptic activity
had the key function in Klopf’s hypothesis of making synapses eligible—the term he
introduced—for modiﬁcation by later reward or punishment. He conjectured that these
traces are implemented by molecular mechanisms local to each synapse and therefore
di↵erent from the electrical activity of both the pre- and the postsynaptic neurons. In


--- Page 425 ---

15.9. Hedonistic Neurons
403
the Bibliographical and Historical Remarks section of this chapter we bring attention to
some similar proposals made by others.
Klopf speciﬁcally conjectured that synaptic eﬃcacies change in the following way. When
a neuron ﬁres an action potential, all of its synapses that were active in contributing to
that action potential become eligible to undergo changes in their eﬃcacies. If the action
potential is followed within an appropriate time period by an increase of reward, the
eﬃcacies of all the eligible synapses increase. Symmetrically, if the action potential is
followed within an appropriate time period by an increase of punishment, the eﬃcacies
of eligible synapses decrease. This is implemented by triggering an eligibility trace at a
synapse upon a coincidence of presynaptic and postsynaptic activity (or more exactly,
upon pairing of presynaptic activity with the postsynaptic activity that that presynaptic
activity participates in causing)—what we call a contingent eligibility trace. This is
essentially the three-factor learning rule of an actor unit described in the previous section.
The shape and time course of an eligibility trace in Klopf’s theory reﬂects the durations
of the many feedback loops in which the neuron is embedded, some of which lie entirely
within the brain and body of the organism, while others extend out through the organism’s
external environment as mediated by its motor and sensory systems. His idea was that
the shape of a synaptic eligibility trace is like a histogram of the durations of the feedback
loops in which the neuron is embedded. The peak of an eligibility trace would then occur
at the duration of the most prevalent feedback loops in which that neuron participates.
The eligibility traces used by algorithms described in this book are simpliﬁed versions
of Klopf’s original idea, being exponentially (or geometrically) decreasing functions
controlled by the parameters λ and γ. This simpliﬁes simulations as well as theory, but
we regard these simple eligibility traces as a placeholders for traces closer to Klopf’s
original conception, which would have computational advantages in complex reinforcement
learning systems by reﬁning the credit-assignment process.
Klopf’s hedonistic neuron hypothesis is not as implausible as it may at ﬁrst appear.
A well-studied example of a single cell that seeks some stimuli and avoids others is the
bacterium Escherichia coli. The movement of this single-cell organism is inﬂuenced by
chemical stimuli in its environment, behavior known as chemotaxis. It swims in its liquid
environment by rotating hairlike structures called ﬂagella attached to its surface. (Yes,
it rotates them!) Molecules in the bacterium’s environment bind to receptors on its
surface. Binding events modulate the frequency with which the bacterium reverses ﬂagellar
rotation. Each reversal causes the bacterium to tumble in place and then head o↵in a
random new direction. A little chemical memory and computation causes the frequency
of ﬂagellar reversal to decrease when the bacterium swims toward higher concentrations
of molecules it needs to survive (attractants) and increase when the bacterium swims
toward higher concentrations of molecules that are harmful (repellants). The result is
that the bacterium tends to persist in swimming up attractant gradients and tends to
avoid swimming up repellant gradients.
The chemotactic behavior just described is called klinokinesis. It is a kind of trial-
and-error behavior, although it is unlikely that learning is involved: the bacterium needs
a modicum of short-term memory to detect molecular concentration gradients, but it
probably does not maintain long-term memories. Artiﬁcial intelligence pioneer Oliver


--- Page 426 ---

404
Chapter 15: Neuroscience
Selfridge called this strategy “run and twiddle,” pointing out its utility as a basic adaptive
strategy: “keep going in the same way if things are getting better, and otherwise move
around” (Selfridge, 1978, 1984). Similarly, one might think of a neuron “swimming” (not
literally of course) in a medium composed of the complex collection of feedback loops
in which it is embedded, acting to obtain one type of input signal and to avoid others.
Unlike the bacterium, however, the neuron’s synaptic strengths retain information about
its past trial-and-error behavior. If this view of the behavior of a neuron (or just one type
of neuron) is plausible, then the closed-loop nature of how the neuron interacts with its
environment is important for understanding its behavior, where the neuron’s environment
consists of the rest of the animal together with the environment with which the animal
as a whole interacts.
Klopf’s hedonistic neuron hypothesis extended beyond the idea that individual neurons
are reinforcement learning agents. He argued that many aspects of intelligent behavior
can be understood as the result of the collective behavior of a population of self-interested
hedonistic neurons interacting with one another in an immense society or economic system
making up an animal’s nervous system. Whether or not this view of nervous systems
is useful, the collective behavior of reinforcement learning agents has implications for
neuroscience. We take up this subject next.
15.10
Collective Reinforcement Learning
The behavior of populations of reinforcement learning agents is deeply relevant to the
study of social and economic systems, and if anything like Klopf’s hedonistic neuron
hypothesis is correct, to neuroscience as well. The hypothesis described above about how
an actor–critic algorithm might be implemented in the brain only narrowly addresses
the implications of the fact that the dorsal and ventral subdivisions of the striatum, the
respective locations of the actor and the critic according to the hypothesis, each contain
millions of medium spiny neurons whose synapses undergo change modulated by phasic
bursts of dopamine neuron activity.
The actor in Figure 15.5a is a single-layer network of k actor units. The actions
produced by this network are vectors (A1, A2, · · · , Ak)> presumed to drive the animal’s
behavior. Changes in the eﬃcacies of the synapses of all of these units depend on the
reinforcement signal δ. Because actor units attempt to make δ as large as possible, δ
e↵ectively acts as a reward signal for them (so in this case reinforcement is the same
as reward). Thus, each actor unit is itself a reinforcement learning agent—a hedonistic
neuron if you will. Now, to make the situation as simple as possible, assume that each
of these units receives the same reward signal at the same time (although, as indicated
above, the assumption that dopamine is released at all the corticostriatal synapses under
the same conditions and at the same times is likely an oversimpliﬁcation).
What can reinforcement learning theory tell us about what happens when all members
of a population of reinforcement learning agents learn according to a common reward
signal? The ﬁeld of multi-agent reinforcement learning considers many aspects of learning
by populations of reinforcement learning agents. Although this ﬁeld is beyond the scope
of this book, we believe that some of its basic concepts and results are relevant to thinking


--- Page 427 ---

15.10.
Collective Reinforcement Learning
405
about the brain’s di↵use neuromodulatory systems. In multi-agent reinforcement learning
(and in game theory), the scenario in which all the agents try to maximize a common
reward signal that they simultaneously receive is known as a cooperative game or a team
problem.
What makes a team problem interesting and challenging is that the common reward
signal sent to each agent evaluates the pattern of activity produced by the entire population,
that is, it evaluates the collective action of the team members. This means that any
individual agent has only limited ability to a↵ect the reward signal because any single
agent contributes just one component of the collective action evaluated by the common
reward signal. E↵ective learning in this scenario requires addressing a structural credit
assignment problem: which team members, or groups of team members, deserve credit for
a favorable reward signal, or blame for an unfavorable reward signal? It is a cooperative
game, or a team problem, because the agents are united in seeking to increase the same
reward signal: there are no conﬂicts of interest among the agents. The scenario would be
a competitive game if di↵erent agents receive di↵erent reward signals, where each reward
signal again evaluates the collective action of the population, and the objective of each
agent is to increase its own reward signal. In this case there might be conﬂicts of interest
among the agents, meaning that actions that are good for some agents are bad for others.
Even deciding what the best collective action should be is a non-trivial aspect of game
theory. This competitive setting might be relevant to neuroscience too (for example, to
account for heterogeneity of dopamine neuron activity), but here we focus only on the
cooperative, or team, case.
How can each reinforcement learning agent in a team learn to “do the right thing” so
that the collective action of the team is highly rewarded? An interesting result is that
if each agent can learn e↵ectively despite its reward signal being corrupted by a large
amount of noise, and despite its lack of access to complete state information, then the
population as a whole will learn to produce collective actions that improve as evaluated by
the common reward signal, even when the agents cannot communicate with one another.
Each agent faces its own reinforcement learning task in which its inﬂuence on the reward
signal is deeply buried in the noise created by the inﬂuences of other agents. In fact, for
any agent, all the other agents are part of its environment because its input, both the part
conveying state information and the reward part, depends on how all the other agents
are behaving. Furthermore, lacking access to the actions of the other agents, indeed
lacking access to the parameters determining their policies, each agent can only partially
observe the state of its environment. This makes each team member’s learning task very
diﬃcult, but if each uses a reinforcement learning algorithm able to increase a reward
signal even under these diﬃcult conditions, teams of reinforcement learning agents can
learn to produce collective actions that improve over time as evaluated by the team’s
common reward signal.
If the team members are neuron-like units, then each unit has to have the goal of
increasing the amount of reward it receives over time, as the actor unit does that we
described in Section 15.8. Each unit’s learning algorithm has to have two essential features.
First, it has to use contingent eligibility traces. Recall that a contingent eligibility trace,
in neural terms, is initiated (or increased) at a synapse when its presynaptic input


--- Page 428 ---

406
Chapter 15: Neuroscience
participates in causing the postsynaptic neuron to ﬁre. A non-contingent eligibility trace,
in contrast, is initiated or increased by presynaptic input independently of what the
postsynaptic neuron does. As explained in Section 15.8, by keeping information about
what actions were taken in what states, contingent eligibility traces allow credit for
reward, or blame for punishment, to be apportioned to an agent’s policy parameters
according to the contribution the values of these parameters made in determining the
agent’s action. By similar reasoning, a team member must remember its recent action so
that it can either increase or decrease the likelihood of producing that action according
to the reward signal that is subsequently received. The action component of a contingent
eligibility trace implements this action memory. Because of the complexity of the learning
task, however, contingent eligibility is merely a preliminary step in the credit assignment
process: the relationship between a single team member’s action and changes in the
team’s reward signal is a statistical correlation that has to be estimated over many trials.
Contingent eligibility is an essential but preliminary step in this process.
Learning with non-contingent eligibility traces does not work at all in the team setting
because it does not provide a way to correlate actions with consequent changes in the
reward signal. Non-contingent eligibility traces are adequate for learning to predict, as
the critic component of the actor–critic algorithm does, but they do not support learning
to control, as the actor component must do. The members of a population of critic-like
agents may still receive a common reinforcement signal, but they would all learn to
predict the same quantity (which in the case of an actor–critic method, would be the
expected return for the current policy). How successful each member of the population
would be in learning to predict the expected return would depend on the information it
receives, which could be very di↵erent for di↵erent members of the population. There
would be no need for the population to produce di↵erentiated patterns of activity. This
is not a team problem as deﬁned here.
A second requirement for collective learning in a team problem is that there has to be
variability in the actions of the team members in order for the team to explore the space
of collective actions. The simplest way for a team of reinforcement learning agents to do
this is for each member to independently explore its own action space through persistent
variability in its output. This will cause the team as a whole to vary its collective actions.
For example, a team of the actor units described in Section 15.8 explores the space
of collective actions because the output of each unit, being a Bernoulli-logistic unit,
probabilistically depends on the weighted sum of its input vector’s components. The
weighted sum biases ﬁring probability up or down, but there is always variability. Because
each unit uses a REINFORCE policy gradient algorithm (Chapter 13), each unit adjusts
its weights with the goal of maximizing the average reward rate it experiences while
stochastically exploring its own action space. One can show, as Williams (1992) did, that
a team of Bernoulli-logistic REINFORCE units implements a policy gradient algorithm
as a whole with respect to average rate of the team’s common reward signal, where the
actions are the collective actions of the team.
Further, Williams (1992) showed that a team of Bernoulli-logistic units using REIN-
FORCE ascends the average reward gradient when the units in the team are interconnected
to form a multilayer ANN. In this case, the reward signal is broadcast to all the units in


--- Page 429 ---

15.11.
Model-based Methods in the Brain
407
the network, though reward may depend only on the collective actions of the network’s
output units. This means that a multilayer team of Bernoulli-logistic REINFORCE
units learns like a multilayer network trained by the widely-used error backpropagation
method, but in this case the backpropagation process is replaced by the broadcasted
reward signal. In practice, the error backpropagation method is considerably faster,
but the reinforcement learning team method is more plausible as a neural mechanism,
especially in light of what is being learned about reward-modulated STDP as discussed
in Section 15.8.
Exploration through independent exploration by team members is only the simplest
way for a team to explore; more sophisticated methods are possible if the team members
coordinate their actions to focus on particular parts of the collective action space, either
by communicating with one another or by responding to common inputs. There are also
mechanisms more sophisticated than contingent eligibility traces for addressing structural
credit assignment, which is easier in a team problem when the set of possible collective
actions is restricted in some way. An extreme case is a winner-take-all arrangement (for
example, the result of lateral inhibition in the brain) that restricts collective actions to
those to which only one, or a few, team members contribute. In this case the winners get
the credit or blame for resulting reward or punishment.
Details of learning in cooperative games (or team problems) and non-cooperative
game problems are beyond the scope of this book. The Bibliographical and Historical
Remarks section at the end of this chapter cites a selection of the relevant publications,
including extensive references to research on implications for neuroscience of collective
reinforcement learning.
15.11
Model-based Methods in the Brain
Reinforcement learning’s distinction between model-free and model-based algorithms is
proving to be useful for thinking about animal learning and decision processes. Section 14.6
discusses how this distinction aligns with that between habitual and goal-directed animal
behavior. The hypothesis discussed above about how the brain might implement an
actor–critic algorithm is relevant only to an animal’s habitual mode of behavior because
the basic actor–critic method is model-free. What neural mechanisms are responsible
for producing goal-directed behavior, and how do they interact with those underlying
habitual behavior?
One way to investigate questions about the brain structures involved in these modes
of behavior is to inactivate an area of a rat’s brain and then observe what the rat does in
an outcome-devaluation experiment (Section 14.6). Results from experiments like these
indicate that the actor–critic hypothesis described above is too simple in placing the
actor in the dorsal striatum. Inactivating one part of the dorsal striatum, the dorsolateral
striatum (DLS), impairs habit learning, causing the animal to rely more on goal-directed
processes. On the other hand, inactivating the dorsomedial striatum (DMS) impairs
goal-directed processes, requiring the animal to rely more on habit learning. Results
like these support the view that the DLS in rodents is more involved in model-free
processes, whereas their DMS is more involved in model-based processes. Results of


--- Page 430 ---

408
Chapter 15: Neuroscience
studies with human subjects in similar experiments using functional neuroimaging, and
with non-human primates, support the view that the analogous structures in the primate
brain are di↵erentially involved in habitual and goal-directed modes of behavior.
Other studies identify activity associated with model-based processes in the prefrontal
cortex of the human brain, the front-most part of the frontal cortex implicated in
executive function, including planning and decision making. Speciﬁcally implicated is the
orbitofrontal cortex (OFC), the part of the prefrontal cortex immediately above the eyes.
Functional neuroimaging in humans, and also recordings of the activities of single neurons
in monkeys, reveals strong activity in the OFC related to the subjective reward value
of biologically signiﬁcant stimuli, as well as activity related to the reward expected as a
consequence of actions. Although not free of controversy, these results suggest signiﬁcant
involvement of the OFC in goal-directed choice. It may be critical for the reward part of
an animal’s environment model.
Another structure involved in model-based behavior is the hippocampus, a structure
critical for memory and spatial navigation. A rat’s hippocampus plays a critical role
in the rat’s ability to navigate a maze in the goal-directed manner that led Tolman to
the idea that animals use models, or cognitive maps, in selecting actions (Section 14.5).
The hippocampus may also be a critical component of our human ability to imagine
new experiences (Hassabis and Maguire, 2007; ´Olafsd´ottir, Barry, Saleem, Hassabis, and
Spiers, 2015).
The ﬁndings that most directly implicate the hippocampus in planning—the process
needed to enlist an environment model in making decisions—come from experiments
that decode the activity of neurons in the hippocampus to determine what part of space
hippocampal activity is representing on a moment-to-moment basis. When a rat pauses
at a choice point in a maze, the representation of space in the hippocampus sweeps
forward (and not backwards) along the possible paths the animal can take from that
point (Johnson and Redish, 2007). Furthermore, the spatial trajectories represented by
these sweeps closely correspond to the rat’s subsequent navigational behavior (Pfei↵er
and Foster, 2013). These results suggest that the hippocampus is critical for the state-
transition part of an animal’s environment model, and that it is part of a system that
uses the model to simulate possible future state sequences to assess the consequences of
possible courses of action: a form of planning.
The results described above add to a voluminous literature on neural mechanisms
underlying goal-directed, or model-based, learning and decision making, but many
questions remain unanswered. For example, how can areas as structurally similar as the
DLS and DMS be essential components of modes of learning and behavior that are as
di↵erent as model-free and model-based algorithms? Are separate structures responsible
for (what we call) the transition and reward components of an environment model? Is all
planning conducted at decision time via simulations of possible future courses of action
as the forward sweeping activity in the hippocampus suggests? In other words, is all
planning something like a rollout algorithm (Section 8.10)? Or are models sometimes
engaged in the background to reﬁne or recompute value information as illustrated by the
Dyna architecture (Section 8.2)? How does the brain arbitrate between the use of the
habit and goal-directed systems? Is there, in fact, a clear separation between the neural
substrates of these systems?


--- Page 431 ---

15.12.
Addiction
409
The evidence is not pointing to a positive answer to this last question. Summarizing
the situation, Doll, Simon, and Daw (2012) wrote that “model-based inﬂuences appear
ubiquitous more or less wherever the brain processes reward information,” and this is
true even in the regions thought to be critical for model-free learning. This includes the
dopamine signals themselves, which can exhibit the inﬂuence of model-based information
in addition to the reward prediction errors thought to be the basis of model-free processes.
Continuing neuroscience research informed by reinforcement learning’s model-free and
model-based distinction has the potential to sharpen our understanding of habitual and
goal-directed processes in the brain. A better grasp of these neural mechanisms may lead
to algorithms combining model-free and model-based methods in ways that have not yet
been explored in computational reinforcement learning.
15.12
Addiction
Understanding the neural basis of drug abuse is a high-priority goal of neuroscience with
the potential to produce new treatments for this serious public health problem. One
view is that drug craving is the result of the same motivation and learning processes that
lead us to seek natural rewarding experiences that serve our biological needs. Addictive
substances, by being intensely reinforcing, e↵ectively co-opt our natural mechanisms
of learning and decision making. This is plausible given that many—though not all—
drugs of abuse increase levels of dopamine either directly or indirectly in regions around
terminals of dopamine neuron axons in the striatum, a brain structure ﬁrmly implicated in
normal reward-based learning (Section 15.7). But the self-destructive behavior associated
with drug addiction is not characteristic of normal learning. What is di↵erent about
dopamine-mediated learning when the reward is the result of an addictive drug? Is
addiction the result of normal learning in response to substances that were largely
unavailable throughout our evolutionary history, so that evolution could not select against
their damaging e↵ects? Or do addictive substances somehow interfere with normal
dopamine-mediated learning?
The reward prediction error hypothesis of dopamine neuron activity and its connection
to TD learning are the basis of a model due to Redish (2004) of some—but certainly not
all—features of addiction. The model is based on the observation that administration of
cocaine and some other addictive drugs produces a transient increase in dopamine. In the
model, this dopamine surge is assumed to increase the TD error, δ, in a way that cannot
be cancelled out by changes in the value function. In other words, whereas δ is reduced
to the degree that a normal reward is predicted by antecedent events (Section 15.6), the
contribution to δ due to an addictive stimulus does not decrease as the reward signal
becomes predicted: drug rewards cannot be “predicted away.” The model does this by
preventing δ from ever becoming negative when the reward signal is due to an addictive
drug, thus eliminating the error-correcting feature of TD learning for states associated
with administration of the drug. The result is that the values of these states increase
without bound, making actions leading to these states preferred above all others.


--- Page 432 ---

410
Chapter 15: Neuroscience
Addictive behavior is much more complicated than this result from Redish’s model, but
the model’s main idea may be a piece of the puzzle. Or the model might be misleading.
Dopamine appears not to play a critical role in all forms of addiction, and not everyone
is equally susceptible to developing addictive behavior. Moreover, the model does not
include the changes in many circuits and brain regions that accompany chronic drug
taking, for example, changes that lead to a drug’s diminishing e↵ect with repeated use.
It is also likely that addiction involves model-based processes. Still, Redish’s model
illustrates how reinforcement learning theory can be enlisted in the e↵ort to understand
a major health problem. In a similar manner, reinforcement learning theory has been
inﬂuential in the development of the new ﬁeld of computational psychiatry, which aims
to improve understanding of mental disorders through mathematical and computational
methods.
15.13
Summary
The neural pathways involved in the brain’s reward system are complex and incompletely
understood, but neuroscience research directed toward understanding these pathways
and their roles in behavior is progressing rapidly. This research is revealing striking
correspondences between the brain’s reward system and the theory of reinforcement
learning as presented in this book.
The reward prediction error hypothesis of dopamine neuron activity was proposed by
scientists who recognized striking parallels between the behavior of TD errors and the
activity of neurons that produce dopamine, a neurotransmitter essential in mammals
for reward-related learning and behavior. Experiments conducted in the late 1980s and
1990s in the laboratory of neuroscientist Wolfram Schultz showed that dopamine neurons
respond to rewarding events with substantial bursts of activity, called phasic responses,
only if the animal does not expect those events, suggesting that dopamine neurons are
signaling reward prediction errors instead of reward itself. Further, these experiments
showed that as an animal learns to predict a rewarding event on the basis of preceding
sensory cues, the phasic activity of dopamine neurons shifts to earlier predictive cues
while decreasing to later predictive cues. This parallels the backing-up e↵ect of the TD
error as a reinforcement learning agent learns to predict reward.
Other experimental results ﬁrmly establish that the phasic activity of dopamine neurons
is a reinforcement signal for learning that reaches multiple areas of the brain by means of
profusely branching axons of dopamine producing neurons. These results are consistent
with the distinction we make between a reward signal, Rt, and a reinforcement signal,
which is the TD error δt in most of the algorithms we present. Phasic responses of
dopamine neurons are reinforcement signals, not reward signals.
A prominent hypothesis is that the brain implements something like an actor–critic
algorithm.
Two structures in the brain (the dorsal and ventral subdivisions of the
striatum), both of which play critical roles in reward-based learning, may function
respectively like an actor and a critic. That the TD error is the reinforcement signal for
both the actor and the critic ﬁts well with the facts that dopamine neuron axons target
both the dorsal and ventral subdivisions of the striatum; that dopamine appears to be


--- Page 433 ---

15.13.
Summary
411
critical for modulating synaptic plasticity in both structures; and that the e↵ect on a
target structure of a neuromodulator such as dopamine depends on properties of the
target structure and not just on properties of the neuromodulator.
The actor and the critic can be implemented by ANNs consisting of neuron-like units
having learning rules based on the policy-gradient actor–critic method described in
Section 13.5. Each connection in these networks is like a synapse between neurons in
the brain, and the learning rules correspond to rules governing how synaptic eﬃcacies
change as functions of the activities of the presynaptic and the postsynaptic neurons,
together with neuromodulatory input corresponding to input from dopamine neurons. In
this setting, each synapse has its own eligibility trace that records past activity involving
that synapse. The only di↵erence between the actor and critic learning rules is that they
use di↵erent kinds of eligibility traces: the critic unit’s traces are non-contingent because
they do not involve the critic unit’s output, whereas the actor unit’s traces are contingent
because in addition to the actor unit’s input, they depend on the actor unit’s output. In
the hypothetical implementation of an actor–critic system in the brain, these learning
rules respectively correspond to rules governing plasticity of corticostriatal synapses that
convey signals from the cortex to the principal neurons in the dorsal and ventral striatal
subdivisions, synapses that also receive inputs from dopamine neurons.
The learning rule of an actor unit in the actor–critic network closely corresponds to
reward-modulated spike-timing-dependent plasticity. In spike-timing-dependent plasticity
(STDP), the relative timing of pre- and postsynaptic activity determines the direction of
synaptic change. In reward-modulated STDP, changes in synapses in addition depend
on a neuromodulator, such as dopamine, arriving within a time window that can last
up to 10 seconds after the conditions for STDP are met. Evidence is accumulating that
reward-modulated STDP occurs at corticostriatal synapses, where the actor’s learning
takes place in the hypothetical neural implementation of an actor–critic system, adds to
the plausibility of the hypothesis that something like an actor–critic system exists in the
brains of some animals.
The idea of synaptic eligibility and basic features of the actor learning rule derive
from Klopf’s hypothesis of the “hedonistic neuron” (Klopf, 1972, 1981). He conjectured
that individual neurons seek to obtain reward and to avoid punishment by adjusting the
eﬃcacies of their synapses on the basis of rewarding or punishing consequences of their
action potentials. A neuron’s activity can a↵ect its later input because the neuron is
embedded in many feedback loops, some within the animal’s nervous system and body
and others passing through the animal’s external environment. Klopf’s idea of eligibility
is that synapses are temporarily marked as eligible for modiﬁcation if they participated
in the neuron’s ﬁring (making this the contingent form of eligibility trace). A synapse’s
eﬃcacy is modiﬁed if a reinforcing signal arrives while the synapse is eligible. We alluded
to the chemotactic behavior of a bacterium as an example of a single cell that directs its
movements in order to seek some molecules and to avoid others.
A conspicuous feature of the dopamine system is that ﬁbers releasing dopamine project
widely to multiple parts of the brain. Although it is likely that only some populations
of dopamine neurons broadcast the same reinforcement signal, if this signal reaches
the synapses of many neurons involved in actor-type learning, then the situation can


--- Page 434 ---

412
Chapter 15: Neuroscience
be modeled as a team problem. In this type of problem, each agent in a collection of
reinforcement learning agents receives the same reinforcement signal, where that signal
depends on the activities of all members of the collection, or team. If each team member
uses a suﬃciently capable learning algorithm, the team can learn collectively to improve
performance of the entire team as evaluated by the globally-broadcast reinforcement
signal, even if the team members do not directly communicate with one another. This
is consistent with the wide dispersion of dopamine signals in the brain and provides
a neurally plausible alternative to the widely-used error-backpropagation method for
training multilayer networks.
The distinction between model-free and model-based reinforcement learning is helping
neuroscientists investigate the neural bases of habitual and goal-directed learning and
decision making. Research so far points to their being some brain regions more involved
in one type of process than the other, but the picture remains unclear because model-free
and model-based processes do not appear to be neatly separated in the brain. Many
questions remain unanswered. Perhaps most intriguing is evidence that the hippocampus,
a structure traditionally associated with spatial navigation and memory, appears to be
involved in simulating possible future courses of action as part of an animal’s decision-
making process. This suggests that it is part of a system that uses an environment model
for planning.
Reinforcement learning theory is also inﬂuencing thinking about neural processes
underlying drug abuse. A model of some features of drug addiction is based on the reward
prediction error hypothesis. It proposes that an addicting stimulant, such as cocaine,
destabilizes TD learning to produce unbounded growth in the values of actions associated
with drug intake. This is far from a complete model of addiction, but it illustrates how
a computational perspective suggests theories that can be tested with further research.
The new ﬁeld of computational psychiatry similarly focuses on the use of computational
models, some derived from reinforcement learning, to better understand mental disorders.
This chapter only touched the surface of how the neuroscience of reinforcement learning
and the development of reinforcement learning in computer science and engineering
have inﬂuenced one another. Most features of reinforcement learning algorithms owe
their design to purely computational considerations, but some have been inﬂuenced by
hypotheses about neural learning mechanisms. Remarkably, as experimental data has
accumulated about the brain’s reward processes, many of the purely computationally-
motivated features of reinforcement learning algorithms are turning out to be consistent
with neuroscience data. Other features of computational reinforcement learning, such as
eligibility traces and the ability of teams of reinforcement learning agents to learn to act
collectively under the inﬂuence of a globally-broadcast reinforcement signal, may also
turn out to parallel experimental data as neuroscientists continue to unravel the neural
basis of reward-based animal learning and behavior.


--- Page 435 ---

15.13.
Summary
413
Bibliographical and Historical Remarks
The number of publications treating parallels between the neuroscience of learning and
decision making and the approach to reinforcement learning presented in this book is
enormous. We can cite only a small selection. Niv (2009), Dayan and Niv (2008), Gimcher
(2011), Ludvig, Bellemare, and Pearson (2011), and Shah (2012) are good places to start.
Together with economics, evolutionary biology, and mathematical psychology, reinforce-
ment learning theory is helping to formulate quantitative models of the neural mechanisms
of choice in humans and non-human primates. With its focus on learning, this chapter
only lightly touches upon the neuroscience of decision making. Glimcher (2003) introduced
the ﬁeld of “neuroeconomics,” in which reinforcement learning contributes to the study
of the neural basis of decision making from an economics perspective. See also Glimcher
and Fehr (2013). The text on computational and mathematical modeling in neuroscience
by Dayan and Abbott (2001) includes reinforcement learning’s role in these approaches.
Sterling and Laughlin (2015) examined the neural basis of learning in terms of general
design principles that enable eﬃcient adaptive behavior.
15.1
There are many good expositions of basic neuroscience. Kandel, Schwartz, Jessell,
Siegelbaum, and Hudspeth (2013) is an authoritative and very comprehensive
source.
15.2
Berridge and Kringelbach (2008) reviewed the neural basis of reward and pleasure,
pointing out that reward processing has many dimensions and involves many
neural systems. Space prevents discussion of the inﬂuential research of Berridge
and Robinson (1998), who distinguish between the hedonic impact of a stimulus,
which they call “liking,” and the motivational e↵ect, which they call “wanting.”
Hare, O’Doherty, Camerer, Schultz, and Rangel (2008) examined the neural basis
of value-related signals from an economic perspective, distinguishing between
goal values, decision values, and prediction errors. Decision value is goal value
minus action cost. See also Rangel, Camerer, and Montague (2008), Rangel and
Hare (2010), and Peters and B¨uchel (2010).
15.3
The reward prediction error hypothesis of dopamine neuron activity is most
prominently discussed by Schultz, Dayan, and Montague (1997). The hypothesis
was ﬁrst explicitly put forward by Montague, Dayan, and Sejnowski (1996). As
they stated the hypothesis, it referred to reward prediction errors (RPEs) but
not speciﬁcally to TD errors; however, their development of the hypothesis made
it clear that they were referring to TD errors. The earliest recognition of the
TD-error/dopamine connection of which we are aware is that of Montague, Dayan,
Nowlan, Pouget, and Sejnowski (1993), who proposed a TD-error-modulated
Hebbian learning rule motivated by results on dopamine signaling from Schultz’s
group. The connection was also pointed out in an abstract by Quartz, Dayan,
Montague, and Sejnowski (1992). Montague and Sejnowski (1994) emphasized
the importance of prediction in the brain and outlined how predictive Hebbian
learning modulated by TD errors could be implemented via a di↵use neuromod-
ulatory system, such as the dopamine system. Friston, Tononi, Reeke, Sporns,


--- Page 436 ---

414
Chapter 15: Neuroscience
and Edelman (1994) presented a model of value-dependent learning in the brain
in which synaptic changes are mediated by a TD-like error provided by a global
neuromodulatory signal (although they did not single out dopamine). Mon-
tague, Dayan, Person, and Sejnowski (1995) presented a model of honeybee
foraging using the TD error. The model is based on research by Hammer, Men-
zel, and colleagues (Hammer and Menzel, 1995; Hammer, 1997) showing that
the neuromodulator octopamine acts as a reinforcement signal in the honeybee.
Montague et al. (1995) pointed out that dopamine likely plays a similar role
in the vertebrate brain. Barto (1995a) related the actor–critic architecture to
basal-ganglionic circuits and discussed the relationship between TD learning
and the main results from Schultz’s group. Houk, Adams, and Barto (1995)
suggested how TD learning and the actor–critic architecture might map onto the
anatomy, physiology, and molecular mechanism of the basal ganglia. Doya and
Sejnowski (1998) extended their earlier paper on a model of birdsong learning
(Doya and Sejnowski, 1995) by including a TD-like error identiﬁed with dopamine
to reinforce the selection of auditory input to be memorized. O’Reilly and Frank
(2006) and O’Reilly, Frank, Hazy, and Watz (2007) argued that phasic dopamine
signals are RPEs but not TD errors. In support of their theory they cited results
with variable interstimulus intervals that do not match predictions of a simple
TD model, as well as the observation that higher-order conditioning beyond
second-order conditioning is rarely observed, while TD learning is not so limited.
Dayan and Niv (2008) discussed “the good, the bad, and the ugly” of how
reinforcement learning theory and the reward prediction error hypothesis align
with experimental data. Glimcher (2011) reviewed the empirical ﬁndings that
support the reward prediction error hypothesis and emphasized the signiﬁcance
of the hypothesis for contemporary neuroscience.
15.4
Graybiel (2000) is a brief primer on the basal ganglia. The experiments mentioned
that involve optogenetic activation of dopamine neurons were conducted by Tsai,
Zhang, Adamantidis, Stuber, Bonci, de Lecea, and Deisseroth (2009), Steinberg,
Keiﬂin, Boivin, Witten, Deisseroth, and Janak (2013), and Claridge-Chang,
Roorda, Vrontou, Sjulson, Li, Hirsh, and Miesenb¨ock (2009). Fiorillo, Yun, and
Song (2013), Lammel, Lim, and Malenka (2014), and Saddoris, Cacciapaglia,
Wightmman, and Carelli (2015) are among studies showing that the signaling
properties of dopamine neurons are specialized for di↵erent target regions. RPE-
signaling neurons may belong to one among multiple populations of dopamine
neurons having di↵erent targets and subserving di↵erent functions. Eshel, Tian,
Bukwich, and Uchida (2016) found homogeneity of reward prediction error
responses of dopamine neurons in the lateral VTA during classical conditioning
in mice, though their results do not rule out response diversity across wider areas.
Gershman, Pesaran, and Daw (2009) studied reinforcement learning tasks that
can be decomposed into independent components with separate reward signals,
ﬁnding evidence in human neuroimaging data suggesting that the brain exploits
this kind of structure.


--- Page 437 ---

15.13.
Summary
415
15.5
Schultz’s 1998 survey article is a good entr´ee into the very extensive literature
on reward predicting signaling of dopamine neurons. Berns, McClure, Pagnoni,
and Montague (2001), Breiter, Aharon, Kahneman, Dale, and Shizgal (2001),
Pagnoni, Zink, Montague, and Berns (2002), and O’Doherty, Dayan, Friston,
Critchley, and Dolan (2003) described functional brain imaging studies supporting
the existence of signals like TD errors in the human brain.
15.6
This section roughly follows Barto (1995a) in explaining how TD errors mimic the
main results from Schultz’s group on the phasic responses of dopamine neurons.
15.7
This section is largely based on Takahashi, Schoenbaum, and Niv (2008) and Niv
(2009). To the best of our knowledge, Barto (1995a) and Houk, Adams, and Barto
(1995) ﬁrst speculated about possible implementations of actor–critic algorithms
in the basal ganglia. On the basis of functional magnetic resonance imaging of
human subjects while engaged in instrumental conditioning, O’Doherty, Dayan,
Schultz, Deichmann, Friston, and Dolan (2004) suggested that the actor and
the critic are most likely located respectively in the dorsal and ventral striatum.
Gershman, Moustafa, and Ludvig (2014) focused on how time is represented in
reinforcement learning models of the basal ganglia, discussing evidence for, and
implications of, various computational approaches to time representation.
The hypothetical neural implementation of the actor–critic architecture described
in this section includes very little detail about known basal ganglia anatomy and
physiology. In addition to the more detailed hypothesis of Houk, Adams, and
Barto (1995), a number of other hypotheses include more speciﬁc connections to
anatomy and physiology and are claimed to explain additional data. These include
hypotheses proposed by Suri and Schultz (1998, 1999), Brown, Bullock, and
Grossberg (1999), Contreras-Vidal and Schultz (1999), Suri, Bargas, and Arbib
(2001), O’Reilly and Frank (2006), and O’Reilly, Frank, Hazy, and Watz (2007).
Joel, Niv, and Ruppin (2002) critically evaluated the anatomical plausibility of
several of these models and present an alternative intended to accommodate
some neglected features of basal ganglionic circuitry.
15.8
The actor learning rule discussed here is more complicated than the one in the
early actor–critic network of Barto et al. (1983). Actor-unit eligibility traces in
that network were traces of just At⇥x(St) instead of the full (At−⇡(1|St, ✓))x(St).
That work did not beneﬁt from the policy-gradient theory presented in Chapter 13
or the contributions of Williams (1986, 1992), who showed how an ANN of
Bernoulli-logistic units could implement a policy-gradient method.
Reynolds and Wickens (2002) proposed a three-factor rule for synaptic plasticity
in the corticostriatal pathway in which dopamine modulates changes in corti-
costriatal synaptic eﬃcacy. They discussed the experimental support for this
kind of learning rule and its possible molecular basis. The deﬁnitive demon-
stration of spike-timing-dependent plasticity (STDP) is attributed to Markram,
L¨ubke, Frotscher, and Sakmann (1997), with evidence from earlier experiments


--- Page 438 ---

416
Chapter 15: Neuroscience
by Levy and Steward (1983) and others that the relative timing of pre- and
postsynaptic spikes is critical for inducing changes in synaptic eﬃcacy. Rao and
Sejnowski (2001) suggested how STDP could be the result of a TD-like mechanism
at synapses with non-contingent eligibility traces lasting about 10 milliseconds.
Dayan (2002) commented that this would require an error as in Sutton and
Barto’s (1981a) early model of classical conditioning and not a true TD error.
Representative publications from the extensive literature on reward-modulated
STDP are Wickens (1990), Reynolds and Wickens (2002), and Calabresi, Picconi,
Tozzi and Di Filippo (2007). Pawlak and Kerr (2008) showed that dopamine is
necessary to induce STDP at the corticostriatal synapses of medium spiny neurons.
See also Pawlak, Wickens, Kirkwood, and Kerr (2010). Yagishita, Hayashi-Takagi,
Ellis-Davies, Urakubo, Ishii, and Kasai (2014) found that dopamine promotes
spine enlargement of the medium spiny neurons of mice only during a time window
of from 0.3 to 2 seconds after STDP stimulation. Izhikevich (2007) proposed
and explored the idea of using STDP timing conditions to trigger contingent
eligibility traces. Fr´emaux, Sprekeler, and Gerstner (2010) proposed theoretical
conditions for successful learning by rules based on reward-modulated STDP.
15.9
Klopf’s hedonistic neuron hypothesis (Klopf 1972, 1982) inspired our actor–critic
algorithm implemented as an ANN with a single neuron-like unit, called the
actor unit, implementing a Law-of-E↵ect-like learning rule (Barto, Sutton, and
Anderson, 1983). Ideas related to Klopf’s synaptically-local eligibility have been
proposed by others. Crow (1968) proposed that changes in the synapses of
cortical neurons are sensitive to the consequences of neural activity. Emphasizing
the need to address the time delay between neural activity and its consequences
in a reward-modulated form of synaptic plasticity, he proposed a contingent form
of eligibility, but associated with entire neurons instead of individual synapses.
According to his hypothesis, a wave of neuronal activity
leads to a short-term change in the cells involved in the wave such that they
are picked out from a background of cells not so activated. ... such cells are
rendered sensitive by the short-term change to a reward signal ... in such
a way that if such a signal occurs before the end of the decay time of the
change the synaptic connexions between the cells are made more e↵ective.
(Crow, 1968)
Crow argued against previous proposals that reverberating neural circuits play
this role by pointing out that the e↵ect of a reward signal on such a circuit would
“...establish the synaptic connexions leading to the reverberation (that is to say,
those involved in activity at the time of the reward signal) and not those on the
path which led to the adaptive motor output.” Crow further postulated that
reward signals are delivered via a “distinct neural ﬁber system,” presumably the
one into which Olds and Milner (1954) tapped, that would transform synaptic
connections “from a short into a long-term form.”


--- Page 439 ---

15.13.
Summary
417
In another farsighted hypothesis, Miller proposed a Law-of-E↵ect-like learning
rule that includes synaptically-local contingent eligibility traces:
... it is envisaged that in a particular sensory situation neurone B, by chance,
ﬁres a ‘meaningful burst’ of activity, which is then translated into motor acts,
which then change the situation. It must be supposed that the meaningful
burst has an inﬂuence, at the neuronal level, on all of its own synapses which
are active at the time ... thereby making a preliminary selection of the
synapses to be strengthened, though not yet actually strengthening them.
...The strengthening signal ... makes the ﬁnal selection ... and accomplishes
the deﬁnitive change in the appropriate synapses. (Miller, 1981, p. 81)
Miller’s hypothesis also included a critic-like mechanism, which he called a “sen-
sory analyzer unit,” that worked according to classical conditioning principles to
provide reinforcement signals to neurons so that they would learn to move from
lower- to higher-valued states, thus anticipating the use of the TD error as a rein-
forcement signal in the actor–critic architecture. Miller’s idea not only parallels
Klopf’s (with the exception of its explicit invocation of a distinct “strengthening
signal”), it also anticipated the general features of reward-modulated STDP.
A related though di↵erent idea, which Seung (2003) called the “hedonistic
synapse,” is that synapses individually adjust the probability that they release
neurotransmitter in the manner of the Law of E↵ect: if reward follows release,
the release probability increases, and decreases if reward follows failure to release.
This is essentially the same as the learning scheme Minsky used in his 1954
Princeton PhD dissertation, where he called the synapse-like learning element
a SNARC (Stochastic Neural-Analog Reinforcement Calculator). Contingent
eligibility is involved in these ideas too, although it is contingent on the activity
of an individual synapse instead of the postsynaptic neuron. Also related is the
proposal of Unnikrishnan and Venugopal (1994) that uses the correlation-based
method of Harth and Tzanakou (1974) to adjust ANN weights.
Frey and Morris (1997) proposed the idea of a “synaptic tag” for the induction
of long-lasting strengthening of synaptic eﬃcacy. Though not unlike Klopf’s
eligibility, their tag was hypothesized to consist of a temporary strengthening of a
synapse that could be transformed into a long-lasting strengthening by subsequent
neuron activation. The model of O’Reilly and Frank (2006) and O’Reilly, Frank,
Hazy, and Watz (2007) uses working memory to bridge temporal intervals instead
of eligibility traces. Wickens and Kotter (1995) discuss possible mechanisms
for synaptic eligibility. He, Huertas, Hong, Tie, Hell, Shouval, Kirkwood (2015)
provide evidence supporting the existence of contingent eligibility traces in
synapses of cortical neurons with time courses like those of the eligibility traces
Klopf postulated.
The metaphor of a neuron using a learning rule related to bacterial chemotaxis was
discussed by Barto (1989). Koshland’s extensive study of bacterial chemotaxis
was in part motivated by similarities between features of bacteria and features of
neurons (Koshland, 1980). See also Berg (1975). Shimansky (2009) proposed a


--- Page 440 ---

418
Chapter 15: Neuroscience
synaptic learning rule somewhat similar to Seung’s mentioned above in which
each synapse individually acts like a chemotactic bacterium. In this case a
collection of synapses “swims” toward attractants in the high-dimensional space
of synaptic weight values. Montague, Dayan, Person, and Sejnowski (1995)
proposed a chemotactic-like model of the bee’s foraging behavior involving the
neuromodulator octopamine.
15.10
Research on the behavior of reinforcement learning agents in team and game
problems has a long history roughly occurring in three phases. To the best
of our knowledge, the ﬁrst phase began with investigations by the Russian
mathematician and physicist M. L. Tsetlin. A collection of his work was published
as Tsetlin (1973) after his death in 1966. Our Sections 1.7 and 4.8 refer to his
study of learning automata in connection to bandit problems.
The Tsetlin
collection also includes studies of learning automata in team and game problems,
which led to later work in this area using stochastic learning automata as
described by Narendra and Thathachar (1974, 1989), Viswanathan and Narendra
(1974), Lakshmivarahan and Narendra (1982), Narendra and Wheeler (1983), and
Thathachar and Sastry (2002). Thathachar and Sastry (2011) is a more recent
comprehensive account. These studies were mostly restricted to non-associative
learning automata, meaning that they did not address associative, or contextual,
bandit problems (Section 2.9).
The second phase began with the extension of learning automata to the associative,
or contextual, case. Barto, Sutton, and Brouwer (1981) and Barto and Sutton
(1981b) experimented with associative stochastic learning automata in single-
layer ANNs to which a global reinforcement signal was broadcast. The learning
algorithm was an associative extension of the Alopex algorithm of Harth and
Tzanakou (1974). Barto et al. called neuron-like elements implementing this
kind of learning associative search elements (ASEs). Barto and Anandan (1985)
introduced an associative reinforcement learning algorithm called the associative
reward-penalty (AR−P) algorithm. They proved a convergence result by combining
theory of stochastic learning automata with theory of pattern classiﬁcation. Barto
(1985, 1986) and Barto and Jordan (1987) described results with teams of AR−P
units connected into multi-layer ANNs, showing that they could learn nonlinear
functions, such as XOR and others, with a globally-broadcast reinforcement signal.
Barto (1985) extensively discussed this approach to ANNs and how this type of
learning rule is related to others in the literature at that time. Williams (1992)
mathematically analyzed and broadened this class of learning rules and related
their use to the error backpropagation method for training multilayer ANNs.
Williams (1988) described several ways that backpropagation and reinforcement
learning can be combined for training ANNs. Williams (1992) showed that a
special case of the AR−P algorithm is a REINFORCE algorithm, although better
results were obtained with the general AR−P algorithm (Barto, 1985).


--- Page 441 ---

15.13.
Summary
419
The third phase of interest in teams of reinforcement learning agents was inﬂu-
enced by increased understanding of the role of dopamine as a widely broadcast
neuromodulator and speculation about the existence of reward-modulated STDP.
Much more so than earlier research, this research considers details of synaptic
plasticity and other constraints from neuroscience. Publications include the
following (chronologically and alphabetically): Bartlett and Baxter (1999, 2000),
Xie and Seung (2004), Baras and Meir (2007), Farries and Fairhall (2007), Florian
(2007), Izhikevich (2007), Pecevski, Maass, and Legenstein (2008), Legenstein,
Pecevski, and Maass (2008), Kolodziejski, Porr, and W¨org¨otter (2009), Urbanczik
and Senn (2009), and Vasilaki, Fr´emaux, Urbanczik, Senn, and Gerstner (2009).
Now´e, Vrancx, and De Hauwere (2012) reviewed more recent developments in
the wider ﬁeld of multi-agent reinforcement learning
15.11
Yin and Knowlton (2006) reviewed ﬁndings from outcome-devaluation experi-
ments with rodents supporting the view that habitual and goal-directed behavior
(as psychologists use the phrase) are respectively most associated with process-
ing in the dorsolateral striatum (DLS) and the dorsomedial striatum (DMS).
Results of functional imaging experiments with human subjects in the outcome-
devaluation setting by Valentin, Dickinson, and O’Doherty (2007) suggest that
the orbitofrontal cortex (OFC) is an important component of goal-directed choice.
Single unit recordings in monkeys by Padoa-Schioppa and Assad (2006) support
the role of the OFC in encoding values guiding choice behavior. Rangel, Camerer,
and Montague (2008) and Rangel and Hare (2010) reviewed ﬁndings from the
perspective of neuroeconomics about how the brain makes goal-directed decisions.
Pezzulo, van der Meer, Lansink, and Pennartz (2014) reviewed the neuroscience
of internally generated sequences and presented a model of how these mecha-
nisms might be components of model-based planning. Daw and Shohamy (2008)
proposed that while dopamine signaling connects well to habitual, or model-free,
behavior, other processes are involved in goal-directed, or model-based, behavior.
Data from experiments by Bromberg-Martin, Matsumoto, Hong, and Hikosaka
(2010) indicate that dopamine signals contain information pertinent to both
habitual and goal-directed behavior. Doll, Simon, and Daw (2012) argued that
there may not a clear separation in the brain between mechanisms that subserve
habitual and goal-directed learning and choice.
15.12
Keiﬂin and Janak (2015) reviewed connections between TD errors and addiction.
Nutt, Lingford-Hughes, Erritzoe, and Stokes (2015) critically evaluated the
hypothesis that addiction is due to a disorder of the dopamine system. Montague,
Dolan, Friston, and Dayan (2012) outlined the goals and early e↵orts in the ﬁeld
of computational psychiatry, and Adams, Huys, and Roiser (2015) reviewed more
recent progress.

