============================================================
 Chapter 17 - Frontiers
 (PDF pages 481-502)
============================================================

--- Page 481 ---

Chapter 17
Frontiers
In this ﬁnal chapter we touch on some topics that are beyond the scope of this book but
that we see as particularly important for the future of reinforcement learning. Many of
these topics bring us beyond what is reliably known, and some bring us beyond the MDP
framework.
17.1
General Value Functions and Auxiliary Tasks
Over the course of this book, our notion of value function has become quite general.
With o↵-policy learning we allowed a value function to be conditional on an arbitrary
target policy. Then in Section 12.8 we generalized discounting to a termination function
γ : S 7! [0, 1], so that a di↵erent discount rate could be applied at each time step in
determining the return (12.17). This allowed us to express predictions about how much
reward we will get over an arbitrary, state-dependent horizon. The next, and perhaps
ﬁnal, step is to generalize beyond rewards to permit predictions about arbitrary signals.
Rather than predicting the sum of future rewards, we might predict the sum of the future
values of a sound or color sensation, or of an internal, highly processed signal such as
another prediction. Whatever signal is added up in this way in a value-function-like
prediction, we call it the cumulant of that prediction. We formalize it in a cumulant
signal Ct 2 R. Using this, a general value function, or GVF, is written
v⇡,γ,C(s) .= E
" 1
X
k=t
 
k
Y
i=t+1
γ(Si)
!
Ck+1
44444 St =s, At:1 ⇠⇡
#
.
(17.1)
As with conventional value functions (such as v⇡or q⇤) this is an ideal function that
we seek to approximate with a parameterized form, which we might continue to denote
ˆv(s,w), although of course there would have to be a di↵erent w for each prediction, that
is, for each choice of ⇡, γ, and C. Because a GVF has no necessary connection to reward,
it is perhaps a misnomer to call it a value function. You might simply call it a prediction
or, to make it more distinctive, a forecast (Ring, in preparation). Whatever it is called, it


--- Page 482 ---

460
Chapter 17: Frontiers
is in the form of a value function and thus can be learned in the usual ways using the
methods developed in this book for learning approximate value functions. Along with
the learned predictions, we might also learn policies to maximize the predictions in the
usual ways by Generalized Policy Iteration (Section 4.6) or by actor–critic methods. In
this way an agent could learn to predict and control great numbers of signals, not just
long-term reward.
Why might it be useful to predict and control signals other than long-term reward?
These are auxiliary tasks in that they are extra (in addition to) the main task of
maximizing reward. One answer is that the ability to predict and control a diverse
multitude of signals can constitute a powerful kind of environmental model. As we saw
in Chapter 8, a good model can enable the agent to get reward more eﬃciently. It takes
a couple of further concepts to develop this answer clearly, so we postpone it to the next
section. First let’s consider two simpler ways in which a multitude of diverse predictions
can be helpful to a reinforcement learning agent.
One simple way in which auxiliary tasks can help on the main task is that they may
require some of the same representations as are needed on the main task. Some of the
auxiliary tasks may be easier, with less delay and a clearer connection between actions
and outcomes. If good features can be found early on easy auxiliary tasks, then those
features may signiﬁcantly speed learning on the main task. There is no necessary reason
why this has to be true, but in many cases it seems plausible. For example, if you learn
to predict and control your sensors over short time scales, say seconds, then you might
plausibly come up with part of the idea of physical objects, which would then greatly
help with the prediction and control of long-term reward.
We might imagine an artiﬁcial neural network (ANN) in which the last layer is split
into multiple parts, or heads, each working on a di↵erent task. One head might produce
the approximate value function for the main task (with reward as its cumulant) whereas
the others would produce solutions to various auxiliary tasks. All heads could propagate
errors by stochastic gradient descent into the same body—the shared preceding part
of the network—which would then try to form representations, in its next-to-last layer,
to support all the heads. Researchers have experimented with auxiliary tasks such as
predicting change in pixels, predicting the next time step’s reward, and predicting the
distribution of the return. In many cases this approach has been shown to greatly
accelerate learning on the main task (Jaderberg et al., 2017).
Multiple predictions
have similarly been repeatedly proposed as a way of directing the construction of state
estimates (see Section 17.3).
Another simple way in which the learning of auxiliary tasks can improve performance
is best explained by analogy to the psychological phenomena of classical conditioning
(Section 14.2). One way of understanding classical conditioning is that evolution has
built in a reﬂexive (non-learned) association to a particular action from the prediction
of a particular signal. For example, humans and many other animals appear to have a
built-in reﬂex to blink whenever their prediction of being poked in the eye exceeds some
threshold. The prediction is learned, but the association from prediction to eye closure
is built in, and thus the animal is saved many unprotected pokes in its eye. Similarly,
the association from fear to increased heart rate, or to freezing, may be built in. Agent


--- Page 483 ---

17.2. Temporal Abstraction via Options
461
designers can do something similar, connecting by design (without learning) predictions
of speciﬁc events to predetermined actions. For example, a self-driving car that learns to
predict whether going forward will produce a collision could be given a built-in reﬂex to
stop, or to turn away, whenever the prediction is above some threshold. Or consider a
vacuum-cleaning robot that learned to predict whether it might run out of battery power
before returning to the charger and that reﬂexively headed back to the charger whenever
the prediction became non-zero. The correct prediction would depend on the size of the
house, the room the robot was in, and the age of the battery, all of which would be hard
for the robot designer to know. It would be diﬃcult for the designer to build in a reliable
algorithm for deciding whether to head back to the charger in sensory terms, but it might
be easy to do this in terms of the learned prediction. We foresee many possible ways
like this in which learned predictions might combine usefully with built-in algorithms for
controlling behavior.
Finally, perhaps the most important role for auxiliary tasks is in moving beyond the
assumption we have made throughout this book that the state representation is ﬁxed
and given to the agent. To explain this role, we ﬁrst have to take a few steps back to
appreciate the magnitude of this assumption and the implications of removing it. We do
that in Section 17.3.
17.2
Temporal Abstraction via Options
An appealing aspect of the MDP formalism is that it can be applied usefully to tasks
at many di↵erent time scales. It can be used to formalize the task of deciding which
muscles to twitch to grasp an object, which airplane ﬂight to take to arrive conveniently
at a distant city, and which job to take to lead a satisfying life. These tasks di↵er greatly
in their time scales, yet each can be usefully formulated as an MDP that can be solved
by planning or learning processes as described in this book. All involve interaction with
the world, sequential decision making, and a goal usefully conceived of as accumulating
rewards over time, and so all can be formulated as MDPs.
Although all these tasks can be formulated as MDPs, you might think that they cannot
be formulated as a single MDP. They involve such di↵erent time scales, such di↵erent
notions of choice and action! It would be no good, for example, to plan a ﬂight across a
continent at the level of muscle twitches. Yet for other tasks—such as grasping objects,
throwing darts, or hitting a baseball—low-level muscle twitches may be just the right
level. People do all these things seamlessly without appearing to switch between levels.
Can the MDP framework be stretched to cover all the levels simultaneously?
Perhaps it can. One popular idea is to formalize an MDP at a detailed level, with a
small time step, yet enable planning at higher levels using extended courses of action that
correspond to many base-level time steps. To do this we need a notion of course of action
that extends over many time steps and includes a notion of termination. A general way to
formulate these two ideas is as a policy, ⇡, and a state-dependent termination function, γ,
as in GVFs. We deﬁne a pair of these as a generalized notion of action termed an option.
To execute an option ! = h⇡!, γ!i at time t is to obtain the action to take, At, from
⇡!(·|St), then terminate at time t + 1 with probability 1 −γ!(St+1). If the option does


--- Page 484 ---

462
Chapter 17: Frontiers
not terminate at t+1, then At+1 is selected from ⇡!(·|St+1), and the option terminates at
t + 2 with probability 1 −γ!(St+2), and so on until eventual termination. It is convenient
to consider low-level actions to be special cases of options—each action a corresponds
to an option h⇡!, γ!i whose policy picks the action (⇡!(s)=a for all s 2 S) and whose
termination function is zero (γ!(s) = 0 for all s 2 S+). Options e↵ectively extend the
action space. The agent can either select a low-level action/option, terminating after one
time step, or select an extended option that might execute for many time steps before
terminating.
Options are designed so that they are interchangable with low-level actions. For
example, the notion of an action-value function q⇡naturally generalizes to an option-
value function that takes a state and option as input and returns the expected return
starting from that state, executing that option to termination, and thereafter following
the policy, ⇡. We can also generalize the notion of policy to a hierarchical policy that
selects from options rather than actions, where options, when selected, execute until
termination. With these ideas, many of the algorithms in this book can be generalized to
learn approximate option-value functions and hierarchical policies. In the simplest case,
the learning process ‘jumps’ from option initiation to option termination, with an update
only occurring when an option terminates. More subtly, updates can be made on each
time step, using “intra-option” learning algorithms, which in general require o↵-policy
learning.
Perhaps the most important generalization made possible by option ideas is that of the
environmental model as developed in Chapters 3, 4, and 8. The conventional model of an
action is the state-transition probabilities and the expected immediate reward for taking
the action in each state. How do conventional action models generalize to option models?
For options, the appropriate model is again of two parts, one corresponding to the state
transition resulting from executing the option and one corresponding to the expected
cumulative reward along the way. The reward part of an option model, analogous to the
expected reward for state–action pairs (3.5), is
r(s, !) .= E
⇥
R1 + γR2 + γ2R3 + · · · + γ⌧−1R⌧
44 S0 =s, A0:⌧−1 ⇠⇡!, ⌧⇠γ!
⇤
, (17.2)
for all options ! and all states s 2 S, where ⌧is the random time step at which the option
terminates according to γ!. Note the role of the overall discounting parameter γ in this
equation—discounting is according to γ, but termination of the option is according to
γ!. The state-transition part of an option model is a little more subtle. This part of
the model characterizes the probability of each possible resulting state (as in (3.4)), but
now this state may result after various numbers of time steps, each of which must be
discounted di↵erently. The model for option ! speciﬁes, for each state s that ! might
start executing in, and for each state s0 that ! might terminate in,
p(s0|s, !) .=
1
X
k=1
γk Pr{Sk =s0, ⌧=k | S0 =s, A0:k−1 ⇠⇡!, ⌧⇠γ!}.
(17.3)
Note that, because of the factor of γk, this p(s0|s, !) is no longer a transition probability
and no longer sums to one over all values of s0. (Nevertheless, we continue to use the ‘|’
notation in p.)


--- Page 485 ---

17.2. Temporal Abstraction via Options
463
The above deﬁnition of the transition part of an option model allows us to formulate
Bellman equations and dynamic programming algorithms that apply to all options,
including low-level actions as a special case. For example, the general Bellman equation
for the state values of a hierarchical policy ⇡is
v⇡(s) =
X
!2⌦(s)
⇡(!|s)
"
r(s, !) +
X
s0
p(s0|s, !)v⇡(s0)
#
,
(17.4)
where ⌦(s) denotes the set of options available in state s. If ⌦(s) includes only the
low-level actions, then this equation reduces to a version of the usual Bellman equation
(3.14), except of course γ is included in the new p (17.3) and thus does not appear.
Similarly, the corresponding planning algorithms also have no γ. For example, the value
iteration algorithm with options, analogous to (4.10), is
vk+1(s) .= max
!2⌦(s)
"
r(s, !) +
X
s0
p(s0|s, !)vk(s0)
#
, for all s 2 S.
If ⌦(s) includes all the low-level actions available in each state s, then this algorithm
converges to the conventional v⇤, from which the optimal policy can be computed.
However, it is particularly useful to plan with options when only a subset of the possible
options are considered (in ⌦(s)) in each state. Value iteration will then converge to the
best hierarchical policy limited to the restricted set of options. Although this policy may
be sub-optimal, convergence can be much faster because fewer options are considered
and because each option can jump over many time steps.
To plan with options, the agent must either be given the option models, or learn them.
One natural way to learn an option model is to formulate it as a collection of GVFs (as
deﬁned in the preceding section) and then learn the GVFs using the methods presented
in this book. It is not diﬃcult to see how this could be done for the reward part of the
option model. You merely choose one GVF’s cumulant to be the reward (Ct = Rt), its
policy to be the option’s policy (⇡=⇡!), and its termination function to be the discount
rate times the option’s termination function (γ(s) = γ · γ!(s)). The true GVF then
equals the reward part of the option model, v⇡,γ,C(s) = r(s, !), and the learning methods
described in this book can be used to approximate it. The state-transition part of the
option model is a little more complicated. You need to allocate one GVF for each state
that the option might terminate in. We don’t want these GVFs to accumulate anything
except when the option terminates, and then only when termination is in the appropriate
state. This can be achieved by choosing the cumulant of the GVF that predicts transition
to state s0 to be Ct = (1 −γ!(St))
St=s0. The GVF’s policy and termination functions
are chosen the same as for the reward part of the option model. The true GVF then
equals the s0 portion of the option’s state-transition model, v⇡,γ,C(s) = p(s0|s, !), and
again this book’s methods could be employed to learn it. Although each of these steps
is seemingly natural, putting them all together (including function approximation and
other essential components) is quite challenging and beyond the current state of the art.


--- Page 486 ---

464
Chapter 17: Frontiers
Exercise 17.1 This section has presented options for the discounted case, but discounting
is arguably inappropriate for control when using function approximation (Section 10.4).
What is the natural Bellman equation for a hierarchical policy, analogous to (17.4), but
for the average reward setting (Section 10.3)? What are the two parts of the option
model, analogous to (17.2) and (17.3), for the average reward setting?
⇤
17.3
Observations and State
Throughout this book we have written the learned approximate value functions (and
the policies in Chapter 13) as functions of the environment’s state. This is a signiﬁcant
limitation of the methods presented in Part I, in which the learned value function was
implemented as a table such that any value function could be exactly approximated;
that case is tantamount to assuming that the state of the environment is completely
observed by the agent. But in many cases of interest, and certainly in the lives of all
natural intelligences, the sensory input gives only partial information about the state of
the world. Some objects may be occluded by others, or behind the agent, or miles away.
In these cases, potentially important aspects of the environment’s state are not directly
observable, and it is a strong, unrealistic, and limiting assumption to assume that the
learned value function is implemented as a table over the environment’s state space.
The framework of parametric function approximation that we developed in Part II is far
less restrictive and, arguably, no limitation at all. In Part II we retained the assumption
that the learned value functions (and policies) are functions of the environment’s state,
but allowed these functions to be arbitrarily restricted by the parameterization. It is
somewhat surprising and not widely recognized that function approximation includes
important aspects of partial observability. For example, if there is a state variable that is
not observable, then the parameterization can be chosen such that the approximate value
does not depend on that state variable. The e↵ect is just as if the state variable were not
observable. Because of this, all the results obtained for the parameterized case apply to
partial observability without change. In this sense, the case of parameterized function
approximation includes the case of partial observability.
Nevertheless, there are many issues that cannot be investigated without a more explicit
treatment of partial observability. Although we cannot give them a full treatment here,
we can outline the changes that would be needed to do so. There are four steps.
First, we would change the problem. The environment would emit not its states, but
only observations—signals that depend on its state but, like a robot’s sensors, provide
only partial information about it. For convenience, without loss of generality, we assume
that the reward is a direct, known function of the observation (perhaps the observation is
a vector, and the reward is one of its components). The environmental interaction would
then have no explicit states or rewards, but could simply be an alternating sequence of
actions At 2 A and observations Ot 2 O:
A0, O1, A1, O2, A2, O3, A3, O4, . . . ,
going on forever (cf. Equation 3.1) or forming episodes each ending with a special terminal
observation.


--- Page 487 ---

17.3. Observations and State
465
Second, we can recover the idea of state as used in this book from the sequence of
observations and actions. Let us use the word history, and the notation Ht, for an initial
portion of the trajectory up to an observation: Ht .= A0, O1, . . . , At−1, Ot. The history
represents the most that we can know about the past without looking outside of the
data stream (because the history is the whole past data stream). Of course, the history
grows with t and can become large and unwieldy. The idea of state is that of a compact
summary of the history that is useful for predicting future sequences. To be a summary
of the history, a state must be a function of history, St = f(Ht). The summary would be
informationally perfect if it retained all information about the history (and thus could
be used to predict futures as accurately as could be done from the full history). In this
case, the state St and the function f are said to have the Markov property, and St is a
state as we have used the term in this book. Let us henceforth call it a Markov state
to distinguish it from states that are summaries of the history but are not suﬃcient to
predict all futures. In practice, the states of real agents will not be Markov but may
approach it as an ideal.
To be more explicit about the Markov property it is useful to formalize possible futures.
Let a test be any speciﬁc sequence of alternating actions and observations that might
occur in the future. For example, a three-step test might be denoted ⌧= a1o1a2o2a3o3.
The probability of this test given a speciﬁc history h is deﬁned as
p(⌧|h) .= Pr{Ot+1 =o1, Ot+2 =o2, Ot+3 =o3 | Ht =h, At =a1, At+1 =a2, At+2 =a3}.(17.5)
Formally, f is Markov if and only if, for any test ⌧, and for any histories h and h0 that
map to the same state under f, the test’s probabilities given the two histories are equal:
f(h) = f(h0)
)
p(⌧|h) = p(⌧|h0),
for all h, h0, ⌧2 {A ⇥O}⇤.
(17.6)
A Markov state summarizes all the information in the history necessary for determining
any test’s probability. In fact, it summarizes all that is necessary for making any prediction,
including any GVF. It also summarizes all that is necessary for optimal behavior: if f is
Markov, then there is always a deterministic function ⇡such that choosing At .= ⇡(f(Ht))
is an optimal policy.
The third step in extending reinforcement learning to partial observability is to deal
with certain computational considerations. As mentioned earlier, we want the state to be
compact—relatively small compared to the history. (The identity function, for example,
is not a good f even though it is Markov, because the corresponding state St =Ht would
grow unboundedly with time.) In addition, we don’t really want a function f that takes
whole histories. Instead, we want an f that can be compactly implemented with an
incremental, recursive update that computes St+1 from St, incorporating only the next
increment of data, At and Ot+1:
St+1 .= u(St, At, Ot+1), for all t ≥0,
(17.7)
with the ﬁrst state S0 given. The function u is called the state-update function. For
example, if f were the identity (St =Ht), then u would merely extend St by appending At
and Ot+1 to it. Given f, it is always possible to construct a corresponding u, but it may


--- Page 488 ---

466
Chapter 17: Frontiers
Policy, 
Value fn.
World
Planner
Model
A
O
R
A, R
S
u
A
Figure 17.1: A conceptual agent architecture including a model, a planner, and a state-update
function. The world in this case receives actions A and emits observations O. The observations
and a copy of the action are used by the state-update function u to produce the new state. The
new state is input to the policy and value function, producing the next action, and is also input
to the planner (and to u). The information ﬂows most responsible for learning are shown by
dashed lines that pass diagonally across the boxes that they change. The reward R directly
changes the policy and value function. The action, reward, and state change the model, which
works closely with the planner to also change the policy and value function. Note that the
operation of the planner can be decoupled from the agent–environment interaction, whereas the
other processes should operate in lock step with this interaction to keep up with the arrival of
new data. Also note that the model and planner do not deal with observations directly, but only
with the states produced by u, which can act as targets for model learning.
not be computationally convenient and, as in the identity example, it may not produce
a compact state. The state-update function is a central part of any agent architecture
that handles partial observability. It must be eﬃciently computable, as no actions or
predictions can be made until the state is available. An overall diagram of such an agent
architecture is given in Figure 17.1.
A common strategy for ﬁnding a Markov state is to look for something compact that
is recursively updatable and enables accurate short-term predictions. In fact, it is only
necessary to make accurate one-step predictions. An important fact is that, if an f
is incrementally updatable, then it is Markov if and only if all one-step tests can be
accurately predicted, that is, if and only if
f(h) = f(h0)
)
Pr{Ot+1 =o|Ht =h, At =a} = Pr{Ot+1 =o|Ht =h0, At =a}, (17.8)
for all h, h0 2 {A ⇥O}⇤, o 2 O and a 2 A. Accurate one-step predictions are informa-
tionally suﬃcient, together with the state-update function, to accurately predict the
probability of any test of any length. This can be done by iteratively and alternately
making one-step predictions and applying the state-update function. From the whole
tree of possibilities the exact probability of any test or the expectation of any GVF
can be determined. These observations have led many researchers to focus on one-step
predictions rather than directly on multi-step predictions such as GVFs. However, note


--- Page 489 ---

17.3. Observations and State
467
that determining long-term predictions from single-step predictions is exponentially com-
plex in the length of the predictions. Moreover, one-step predictions can be iterated
to give accurate long-term predictions only if they are exact. If there is any error or
approximation in the one-step predictions, then it can compound to make the long-term
predictions wildly inaccurate. In practice this is often what happens.
An example of obtaining Markov states through a state-update function is provided
by the popular Bayesian approach known as Partially Observable MDPs, or POMDPs.
In this approach the environment is assumed to have a well deﬁned latent state Xt that
underlies and produces the environment’s observations, but is never available to the agent
(and is not to be confused with the state St used by the agent to make predictions and
decisions). The natural Markov state, St, for a POMDP is the distribution over the latent
states given the history, called the belief state. For concreteness, assume the usual case in
which there are a ﬁnite number of hidden states, Xt 2 {1, 2, . . . , d}. Then the belief state
is the vector St .= st 2 [0, 1]d with components
st[i] .= Pr{Xt =i | Ht}, for all possible latent states i 2 {1, 2, . . . , d}.
(17.9)
The belief state remains the same size (same number of components) even as t grows. It
can also be incrementally updated by Bayes’ rule, assuming complete knowledge of the
internal workings of the environment. Speciﬁcally, the ith component of the belief-state
update function is
u(s, a, o)[i] .=
Pd
x=1 s[x]p(i, o|x, a)
Pd
x=1
Pd
x0=1 s[x]p(x0, o|x, a)
,
for all a 2 A, o 2 O,
(17.10)
and for all belief states s with components s[x], where the four-argument p function here
is not the usual one for MDPs (as in Chapter 3), but the analogous one for POMDPs,
in terms of the latent state: p(x0, o|x, a) .= Pr{Xt =x0, Ot =o |Xt−1 =x, At−1 =a}. This
approach is popular in theoretical work and has many signiﬁcant applications, but its
assumptions and computational complexity scale poorly, and we do not recommend it as
an approach to artiﬁcial intelligence.
Another example of Markov states is provided by Predictive State Representations,
or PSRs. PSRs address the weakness of the POMDP approach that the semantics of
its agent state St are grounded in the environment state, Xt, which is never observed
and thus is diﬃcult to learn about. In PSRs and related approaches, the semantics of
the agent state is instead grounded in predictions about future observations and actions,
which are readily observable. In PSRs, a Markov state is deﬁned as a d-vector of the
probabilities of d specially chosen “core” tests as deﬁned above (17.5). The vector is then
updated by a state-update function u that is analogous to Bayes rule, but with a semantics
grounded in observable data, which arguably makes it easier to learn. This approach has
been extended in many ways, including end-tests, compositional tests, powerful “spectral”
methods, and closed-loop and temporally abstract tests learned by TD methods. Some of
the best theoretical developments are for systems known as Observable Operator Models
(OOMs) and Sequential Systems (Thon, 2017).
The fourth and ﬁnal step in our brief outline of how to handle partial observability in
reinforcement learning is to re-introduce approximation. As discussed in the introduction


--- Page 490 ---

468
Chapter 17: Frontiers
to Part II, to approach artiﬁcial intelligence ambitiously we must embrace approximation.
This is just as true for states as it is for value functions. We must accept and work with
an approximate notion of state. The approximate state will play the same role in our
algorithms as before, so we continue to use the notation St for the state used by the
agent, even though it may not be Markov.
Perhaps the simplest example of an approximate state is just the latest observation,
St .=Ot. Of course this approach cannot handle any hidden state information. It would
be better to use the last k observations and actions, St .= Ot, At−1, Ot−1, . . . , At−k, for
some k ≥1, which can be achieved by a state-update function that just shifts the new
data in and the oldest data out. This kth-order history approach is still very simple,
but can greatly increase the agent’s capabilities compared to trying to use the single
immediate observation directly as the state.
What happens when the Markov property (17.8) is only approximately satisﬁed?
Unfortunately, long-term prediction performance can degrade dramatically when one-
step predictions become even slightly inaccurate. Longer-term tests, GVFs, and state-
update functions may or may not approximate better. The short-term and long-term
approximation objectives are just di↵erent, and there are no useful theoretical guarantees
at present.
Nevertheless, there are still reasons to think that the general idea outlined in this
section applies to the approximate case. The general idea is that a state that is good for
some predictions is also good for others—in particular, that a Markov state, suﬃcient for
one-step predictions, is also suﬃcient for all others. If we step back from that speciﬁc
result for the Markov case, the general idea is similar to what we discussed in Section 17.1
with multi-headed learning and auxiliary tasks. We discussed how representations that
were good for the auxiliary tasks were often also good for the main task. Taken together,
these suggest an approach to both partial observability and representation learning in
which multiple predictions are pursued and used to direct the construction of state
features. The guarantee provided by the perfect-but-impractical Markov property is
replaced by the heuristic that what’s good for some predictions may be good for others.
This approach scales well with computational resources. With a powerful computer we
could experiment with large numbers of predictions, perhaps favoring those that are most
similar to the ones of ultimate interest, that are easiest to learn reliably, or that satisfy
other criteria. It is important here to move beyond selecting the predictions manually.
The agent should do it. This would require a general language for predictions, so that
the agent can systematically explore a large space of possible predictions, sifting through
them for the ones that are most useful.
In particular, both POMDP and PSR approaches can be applied with approximate
states. The semantics of the state is often useful in forming the state-update function, as
it is in these two approaches and in the kth-order history approach. However, there is not
a strong need for the state to be accurate with respect to its semantics in order to retain
useful information. Some approaches to state augmentation, such as Echo state networks
(Jaeger, 2002), keep almost arbitrary information about the history and can nevertheless
perform well. There are many possibilities, and we expect more work and ideas in this
area. Learning the state-update function for an approximate state is a major part of the
representation learning problem as it arises in reinforcement learning.


--- Page 491 ---

17.4. Designing Reward Signals
469
17.4
Designing Reward Signals
A major advantage of reinforcement learning over supervised learning is that reinforcement
learning does not rely on detailed instructional information: generating a reward signal
does not depend on knowledge of what the agent’s correct actions should be. But the
success of a reinforcement learning application strongly depends on how well the reward
signal frames the goal of the application’s designer and how well the signal assesses
progress in reaching that goal. For these reasons, designing a reward signal is a critical
part of any application of reinforcement learning.
By designing a reward signal we mean designing the part of an agent’s environment
that is responsible for computing each scalar reward Rt and sending it to the agent at
each time t. In our discussion of terminology at the end of Chapter 14, we said that Rt
is more like a signal generated inside an animal’s brain than it is like an object or event
in the animal’s external environment. The parts of our brains that generate these signals
for us evolved over millions of years to be well suited to the challenges our ancestors
had to face in their struggles to propagate their genes to future generations. We should
therefore not think that designing a good reward signal is always an easy thing to do!
One challenge is to design a reward signal so that as an agent learns, its behavior
approaches, and ideally eventually achieves, what the application’s designer actually
desires. This can be easy if the designer’s goal is simple and easy to identify, such as
ﬁnding the solution to a well-deﬁned problem or earning a high score in a well-deﬁned
game. In cases like these, it is usual to reward the agent according to its success in solving
the problem or its success in improving its score. But some problems involve goals that
are diﬃcult to translate into reward signals. This is especially true when the problem
requires the agent to skillfully perform a complex task or set of tasks, such as would be
required of a useful household robotic assistant. Further, reinforcement learning agents
can discover unexpected ways to make their environments deliver reward, some of which
might be undesirable, or even dangerous. This is a longstanding and critical challenge for
any method, like reinforcement learning, that is based on optimization. We discuss this
issue more in Section 17.6, the ﬁnal section of this book.
Even when there is a simple and easily identiﬁable goal, the problem of sparse reward
often arises. Delivering non-zero reward frequently enough to allow the agent to achieve
the goal once, let alone to learn to achieve it eﬃciently from multiple initial conditions,
can be a daunting challenge. State–action pairs that clearly deserve to trigger reward may
be few and far between, and rewards that mark progress toward a goal can be infrequent
because progress is diﬃcult or even impossible to detect. The agent may wander aimlessly
for long periods of time (what Minsky, 1961, called the “plateau problem”).
In practice, designing a reward signal is often left to an informal trial-and-error search
for a signal that produces acceptable results. If the agent fails to learn, learns too slowly,
or learns the wrong thing, then the designer tweaks the reward signal and tries again.
To do this, the designer judges the agent’s performance by criteria that he or she is
attempting to translate into a reward signal so that the agent’s goal matches his or her
own. And if learning is too slow, the designer may try to design a non-sparse reward signal
that e↵ectively guides learning throughout the agent’s interaction with its environment.


--- Page 492 ---

470
Chapter 17: Frontiers
It is tempting to address the sparse reward problem by rewarding the agent for achieving
subgoals that the designer thinks are important way stations to the overall goal. But
augmenting the reward signal with well-intentioned supplemental rewards may lead the
agent to behave di↵erently from what is intended; the agent may end up not achieving
the overall goal. A better way to provide such guidance is to leave the reward signal
alone and instead augment the value-function approximation with an initial guess of what
it should ultimately be, or augment it with initial guesses as to what certain parts of it
should be. For example, suppose we wants to o↵er v0 : S ! R as an initial guess at the
true optimal value function v⇤, and that we are using linear function approximation with
features x : S ! Rd. Then we would deﬁne the initial value function approximation as
ˆv(s,w) .= w>x(s) + v0(s),
(17.11)
and update the weights w as usual. If the initial weight vector is 0, then the initial
value function will be v0, but the asymptotic solution quality will be determined by the
feature vectors as usual. This initialization can also be done for arbitrary nonlinear
approximators and arbitrary forms of v0, though it is not guaranteed to always accelerate
learning.
A particularly e↵ective approach to the sparse reward problem is the shaping tech-
nique introduced by the psychologist B. F. Skinner and described in Section 14.3. The
e↵ectiveness of this technique relies on the fact that sparse reward problems are not just
problems with the reward signal; they are also problems with an agent’s policy in that
it prevents the agent from frequently encountering rewarding states. Shaping involves
changing the reward signal as learning proceeds, starting from a reward signal that is
not sparse given the agent’s initial behavior, and gradually modifying it toward a reward
signal suited to the problem of original interest. Shaping might also involve modifying
the dynamics of the task as learning proceeds. Each modiﬁcation is made so that the
agent is frequently rewarded given its current behavior. The agent faces a sequence of
increasingly-diﬃcult reinforcement learning problems, where what is learned at each stage
makes the next-harder problem relatively easy because the agent now encounters reward
more frequently than it would if it did not have prior experience with easier problems.
This kind of shaping is an essential technique in training animals, and it is e↵ective in
computational reinforcement learning as well.
What if you have no idea what the rewards should be, but there is another agent,
perhaps a person, who is already expert at the task and whose behavior can be observed?
In this case you could use methods known variously as “imitation learning,” “learning
from demonstration,” and “apprenticeship learning.” The idea here is to beneﬁt from
the expert agent but leave open the possibility of eventually performing better. Learning
from an expert’s behavior can be done either by learning directly by supervised learning
or by extracting a reward signal using what is known as “inverse reinforcement learning”
and then using a reinforcement learning algorithm with that reward signal to learn a
policy. The task of inverse reinforcement learning as explored by Ng and Russell (2000)
is to try to recover the expert’s reward signal from the expert’s behavior alone. This
cannot be done exactly because a policy can be optimal with respect to many di↵erent
reward signals (for example, all policies are optimal with respect to a constant reward
signal), but it is possible to ﬁnd plausible reward signal candidates. Unfortunately, strong


--- Page 493 ---

17.4. Designing Reward Signals
471
assumptions are required, including knowledge of the environment’s dynamics and of the
feature vectors in which the reward signal is linear. The method also requires completely
solving the problem (e.g., by dynamic programming methods) multiple times. These
diﬃculties notwithstanding, Abbeel and Ng (2004) argue that the inverse reinforcement
learning approach can sometimes be more e↵ective than supervised learning for beneﬁting
from the behavior of an expert.
Another approach to ﬁnding a good reward signal is to automate the trial-and-error
search for a good signal that we mentioned above. From an application perspective, the
reward signal is a parameter of the learning algorithm. As is true for other algorithm
parameters, the search for a good reward signal can be automated by deﬁning a space of
feasible candidates and applying an optimization algorithm. The optimization algorithm
evaluates each candidate reward signal by running the reinforcement learning system with
that signal for some number of steps, and then scoring the overall result by a “high-level”
objective function intended to encode the designer’s true goal, ignoring the limitations
of the agent. Reward signals can even be improved via online gradient ascent, where
the gradient is that of the high-level objective function (Sorg, Lewis, and Singh, 2010).
Relating this approach to the natural world, the algorithm for optimizing the high-level
objective function is analogous to evolution, where the high-level objective function is an
animal’s evolutionary ﬁtness determined by the number of its o↵spring that survive to
reproductive age.
Computational experiments with this bilevel optimization approach—one level analo-
gous to evolution, and the other due to reinforcement learning by individual agents—have
conﬁrmed that intuition alone is not always adequate to devise a good reward signal
(Singh, Lewis, and Barto, 2009). The performance of a reinforcement learning agent as
evaluated by the high-level objective function can be very sensitive to details of the agent’s
reward signal in subtle ways determined by the agent’s limitations and the environment
in which it acts and learns. These experiments have also demonstrated that an agent’s
goal should not always be the same as the goal of the agent’s designer.
At ﬁrst this seems counterintuitive, but it may be impossible for the agent to achieve the
designer’s goal no matter what its reward signal is. The agent has to learn under various
kinds of constraints, such as limited computational power, limited access to information
about its environment, or limited time to learn. When there are constraints like these,
learning to achieve a goal that is di↵erent from the designer’s goal can sometimes end up
getting closer to the designer’s goal than if that goal were pursued directly (Sorg, Singh,
and Lewis, 2010; Sorg, 2011). Examples of this in the natural world are easy to ﬁnd.
Because we cannot directly assess the nutritional value of most foods, evolution—the
designer of our reward signal—gave us a reward signal that makes us seek certain tastes.
Though certainly not infallible (indeed, possibly detrimental in environments that di↵er in
certain ways from ancestral environments), this compensates for many of our limitations:
our limited sensory abilities, the limited time over which we can learn, and the risks
involved in ﬁnding a healthy diet through personal experimentation. Similarly, because
an animal cannot always observe its own evolutionary ﬁtness, that objective function
does not work as a reward signal for learning. Evolution instead provides reward signals
that are sensitive to observable predictors of evolutionary ﬁtness.
Finally, remember that a reinforcement learning agent is not necessarily like a complete


--- Page 494 ---

472
Chapter 17: Frontiers
organism or robot; it can be a component of a larger behaving system. This means
that reward signals may be inﬂuenced by things inside the larger behaving agent, such
as motivational states, memories, ideas, or even hallucinations. Reward signals may
also depend on properties of the learning process itself, such as measures of how much
progress learning is making. Making reward signals sensitive to information about internal
factors such as these makes it possible for an agent to learn how to control the “cognitive
architecture” of which it is a part, as well as to acquire knowledge and skills that would be
diﬃcult to learn from a reward signal that depended only on external events. Possibilities
like these led to the idea of “intrinsically-motivated reinforcement learning” that we
brieﬂy discuss further at the end of the following section.
17.5
Remaining Issues
In this book we have presented the foundations of a reinforcement learning approach to
artiﬁcial intelligence. Roughly speaking, that approach is based on model-free and model-
based methods working together, as in the Dyna architecture of Chapter 8, combined
with function approximation as developed in Part II. The focus has been on online and
incremental algorithms, which we see as fundamental even to model-based methods, and
on how these can be applied in o↵-policy training situations. The full rationale for the
latter has been presented only in this last chapter. That is, we have all along presented o↵-
policy learning as an appealing way to deal with the explore/exploit dilemma, but only in
this chapter have we discussed learning about many diverse auxiliary tasks simultaneously
with GVFs and learning about the world hierarchically in terms of temporally-abstract
option models, both of which involve o↵-policy learning. Much remains to be worked
out, as we have indicated throughout the book and as evidenced by the directions for
additional research discussed in this chapter. But suppose we are generous and grant the
broad outlines of everything that we have done in the book and everything that has been
outlined so far in this chapter. What would remain after that? Of course we can’t know
for sure what will be required, but we can make some guesses. In this section we highlight
six further issues which it seems to us will still need to be addressed by future research.
First, we still need powerful parametric function approximation methods that work well
in fully incremental and online settings. Methods based on deep learning and ANNs are
a major step in this direction but, still, only work well with batch training on large data
sets, with training from extensive o↵-line self play, or with learning from the interleaved
experience of multiple agents on the same task. These and other settings are ways of
working around a basic limitation of today’s deep learning methods, which struggle to
learn rapidly in the incremental, online settings that are most natural for the reinforcement
learning algorithms emphasized in this book. The problem is sometimes described as
one of “catastrophic interference” or “correlated data.” When something new is learned
it tends to replace what has previously been learned rather than adding to it, with the
result that the beneﬁt of the older learning is lost. Techniques such as “replay bu↵ers”
are often used to retain and replay old data so that its beneﬁts are not permanently lost.
An honest assessment has to be that current deep learning methods are not well suited to
online learning. We see no reason that this limitation is insurmountable, but algorithms


--- Page 495 ---

17.5. Remaining Issues
473
that address it, while at the same time retaining the advantages of deep learning, have
not yet been devised. Most current deep learning research is directed toward working
around this limitation rather than removing it.
Second (and perhaps closely related), we still need methods for learning features such
that subsequent learning generalizes well. This issue is an instance of a general problem
variously called “representation learning,” “constructive induction,” and “meta-learning”—
how can we use experience not just to learn a given desired function, but to learn inductive
biases such that future learning generalizes better and is thus faster? This is an old
problem, dating back to the origins of artiﬁcial intelligence and pattern recognition in
the 1950s and 1960s.1 Such age should give one pause. Perhaps there is no solution. But
it is equally likely that the time for ﬁnding a solution and demonstrating its e↵ectiveness
has not yet arrived. Today machine learning is conducted at a far larger scale than it has
been in the past, and the potential beneﬁts of a good representation learning method have
become much more apparent. We note that a new annual conference—the International
Conference on Learning Representations—has been exploring this and related topics
every year since 2013. It is also less common to explore representation learning within
a reinforcement learning context. Reinforcement learning brings some new possibilities
to this old issue, such as the auxiliary tasks discussed in Section 17.1. In reinforcement
learning, the problem of representation learning can be identiﬁed with the problem of
learning the state-update function discussed in Section 17.3.
Third, we still need scalable methods for planning with learned environment models.
Planning methods have proven extremely e↵ective in applications such as AlphaGo
Zero and computer chess in which the model of the environment is known from the
rules of the game or can otherwise be supplied by human designers. But cases of full
model-based reinforcement learning, in which the environment model is learned from
data and then used for planning, are rare. The Dyna system described in Chapter 8 is
one example, but as described there and in most subsequent work it uses a tabular model
without function approximation, which greatly limits its applicability. Only a few studies
have included learned linear models, and even fewer have also explored the inclusion of
temporally-abstract models using options as discussed in Section 17.2.
More work is needed before planning with learned models can be e↵ective. For example,
the learning of the model needs to be selective because the scope of a model strongly
a↵ects planning eﬃciency. If a model focuses on the key consequences of the most
important options, then planning can be eﬃcient and rapid, but if a model includes
details of unimportant consequences of options that are unlikely to be selected, then
planning may be almost useless. Environment models should be constructed judiciously
with regard to both their states and dynamics with the goal of optimizing the planning
process. The various parts of the model should be continually monitored as to the degree
to which they contribute to, or detract from, planning eﬃciency. The ﬁeld has not
yet addressed this complex of issues or designed model-learning methods that take into
account their implications.
1Some would claim that deep learning solves this problem, for example, that DQN as described in
Section 16.5 illustrates a solution, but we are unconvinced. There is as yet little evidence that deep
learning alone solves the representation learning problem in a general and eﬃcient way.


--- Page 496 ---

474
Chapter 17: Frontiers
A fourth issue that needs to be addressed in future research is that of automating the
choice of tasks on which an agent works and uses to structure its developing competence.
It is usual in machine learning for human designers to set the tasks that the learning
agent is expected to master. Because these tasks are known in advance and remain ﬁxed,
they can be built into the learning algorithm code. However, looking ahead, we will want
the agent to make its own choices about what tasks it should try to master. These might
be subtasks of a speciﬁc overall task that is already known, or they might be intended to
create building blocks that permit more eﬃcient learning of many di↵erent tasks that the
agent is likely to face in the future but which are currently unknown.
These tasks may be like the auxiliary tasks or the GVFs discussed in Section 17.1, or
tasks solved by options as discussed in Section 17.2. In forming a GVF, for example, what
should the cumulant, the policy, and the termination function be? The current state of
the art is to select these manually, but far greater power and generality would come from
making these task choices automatically, particularly when they derive from what the
agent has previously constructed as a result of representation learning or experience with
previous subproblems. If GVF design is automated, then the design choices themselves
will have to be explicitly represented. Rather than the task choices being in the mind
of the designer and built into the code, they will have to be in the machine itself in
such a way that they can be set and changed, monitored, ﬁltered, and searched among
automatically. Tasks could then be built hierarchically upon others much like features are
in an ANN. The tasks are the questions, and the contents of the ANN are the answers to
those questions. We expect there will need to be a full hierarchy of questions to match
the hierarchy of answers provided by modern deep learning methods.
The ﬁfth issue that we would like to highlight for future research is that of the
interaction between behavior and learning via some computational analog of curiosity.
In this chapter we have been imagining a setting in which many tasks are being learned
simultaneously, using o↵-policy methods, from the same stream of experience. The actions
taken will of course inﬂuence this stream of experience, which in turn will determine how
much learning occurs and which tasks are learned. When reward is not available, or not
strongly inﬂuenced by behavior, the agent is free to choose actions that maximize in
some sense the learning on the tasks, that is, to use some measure of learning progress
as an internal or “intrinsic” reward, implementing a computational form of curiosity. In
addition to measuring learning progress, intrinsic reward can, among other possibilities,
signal the receipt of unexpected, novel, or otherwise interesting input, or can assess the
agent’s ability to cause changes in its environment. Intrinsic reward signals generated in
these ways can be used by an agent to pose tasks for itself by deﬁning auxiliary tasks,
GVFs, or options, as discussed above, so that skills learned in this way can contribute
to the agent’s ability to master future tasks. The result is a computational analog of
something like play. Many preliminary studies of such uses of intrinsic reward signals
have been conducted, and exciting topics for future research remain in this general area.
A ﬁnal issue that demands attention in future research is that of developing methods to
make it acceptably safe to embed reinforcement learning agents into physical environments.
This is one of the most pressing areas for future research, and we discuss it further in the
following section.


--- Page 497 ---

17.6. Reinforcement Learning and the Future of Artiﬁcial Intelligence
475
17.6
Reinforcement Learning and the Future of
Artiﬁcial Intelligence
When we were writing the ﬁrst edition of this book in the mid-1990s, artiﬁcial intelligence
was making signiﬁcant progress and was having an impact on society, though it was
mostly still the promise of artiﬁcial intelligence that was inspiring developments. Machine
learning was part of that outlook, but it had not yet become indispensable to artiﬁcial
intelligence. By today that promise has transitioned to applications that are changing the
lives of millions of people, and machine learning has come into its own as a key technology.
As we write this second edition, some of the most remarkable developments in artiﬁcial
intelligence have involved reinforcement learning, most notably “deep reinforcement
learning”—reinforcement learning with function approximation by deep artiﬁcial neural
networks. We are at the beginning of a wave of real-world applications of artiﬁcial
intelligence, many of which will include reinforcement learning, deep and otherwise, that
will impact our lives in ways that are hard to predict.
But an abundance of successful real-world applications does not mean that true
artiﬁcial intelligence has arrived. Despite great progress in many areas, the gulf between
artiﬁcial intelligence and the intelligence of humans, and other animals, remains great.
Superhuman performance can be achieved in some domains, even formidable domains
like Go, but it remains a signiﬁcant challenge to develop systems that are like us in
being complete, interactive agents having general adaptability and problem-solving skills,
emotional sophistication, creativity, and the ability to learn quickly from experience.
With its focus on learning by interacting with dynamic environments, reinforcement
learning, as it develops over the future, will be a critical component of agents with these
abilities.
Reinforcement learning’s connections to psychology and neuroscience (Chapters 14
and 15) underscore its relevance to another longstanding goal of artiﬁcial intelligence:
shedding light on fundamental questions about the mind and how it emerges from the
brain. Reinforcement learning theory is already contributing to our understanding of
the brain’s reward, motivation, and decision-making processes, and there is good reason
to believe that through its links to computational psychiatry, reinforcement learning
theory will contribute to methods for treating mental disorders, including drug abuse
and addiction.
Another contribution that reinforcement learning can make over the future is as an
aid to human decision making. Policies derived by reinforcement learning in simulated
environments can advise human decision makers in such areas as education, healthcare,
transportation, energy, and public-sector resource allocation. Particularly relevant is the
key feature of reinforcement learning that it takes long-term consequences of decisions
into account. This is very clear in games like backgammon and Go, where some of
the most impressive results of reinforcement learning have been demonstrated, but it
is also a property of many high-stakes decisions that a↵ect our lives and our planet.
Reinforcement learning follows related methods for advising human decision making that
have been developed in the past by decision analysts in many disciplines. With advanced
function approximation methods and massive computational power, reinforcement learning


--- Page 498 ---

476
Chapter 17: Frontiers
methods have the potential to overcome some of the diﬃculties of scaling up traditional
decision-support methods to larger and more complex problems.
The rapid pace of advances in artiﬁcial intelligence has led to warnings that artiﬁcial
intelligence poses serious threats to our societies, even to humanity itself. The renowned
scientist and artiﬁcial intelligence pioneer Herbert Simon anticipated the warnings we are
hearing today in a presentation at the Earthware Symposium at CMU in 2000 (Simon,
2000).
He spoke of the eternal conﬂict between the promise and perils of any new
knowledge, reminding us of the Greek myths of Prometheus, the idealized hero of modern
science, who stole ﬁre from the gods for the beneﬁt of mankind, and of Pandora, whose
mythical box could be opened by a small and innocent action to release untold perils on
the world. While accepting that this conﬂict is inevitable, Simon urged us to recognize
that as designers of our future and not mere spectators, the decisions we make can tilt
the scale in Prometheus’ favor. This is certainly true for reinforcement learning, which
can beneﬁt society but can also produce undesirable outcomes if it is carelessly deployed.
Thus, the safety of artiﬁcial intelligence applications involving reinforcement learning is a
topic that deserves careful attention.
A reinforcement learning agent can learn by interacting with either the real world or
with a simulation of some piece of the real world, or by a mixture of these two sources of
experience. Simulators provide safe environments in which an agent can explore and learn
without risking real damage to itself or to its environment. In most current applications,
policies are learned from simulated experience instead of direct interaction with the
real world. In addition to avoiding undesirable real-world consequences, learning from
simulated experience can make virtually unlimited data available for learning, generally
at less cost than needed to obtain real experience, and because simulations typically run
much faster than real time, learning can often occur more quickly than if it relied on real
experience.
Nevertheless, the full potential of reinforcement learning requires reinforcement learning
agents to be embedded into the ﬂow of real-world experience, where they act, explore,
and learn in our world, and not just in their worlds. After all, reinforcement learning
algorithms—at least those upon which we focus in this book—are designed to learn online,
and they emulate many aspects of how animals are able to survive in nonstationary and
hostile environments. Embedding reinforcement learning agents in the real world can be
transformative in realizing the promises of artiﬁcial intelligence to amplify and extend
human abilities.
A major reason for wanting a reinforcement learning agent to act and learn in the real
world is that it is often diﬃcult, sometimes impossible, to simulate real-world experience
with enough ﬁdelity to make the resulting policies, whether derived by reinforcement
learning or by other methods, work well—and safely—when directing real actions. This
is especially true for environments whose dynamics depend on the behavior of humans,
such as in education, healthcare, transportation, and public policy—domains that can
surely beneﬁt from improved decision making. However, it is for real-world embedded
agents that warnings about potential dangers of artiﬁcial intelligence need to be heeded.
Some of these warnings are particularly relevant to reinforcement learning. Because
reinforcement learning is based on optimization, it inherits the plusses and minuses of all
optimization methods. On the minus side is the problem of devising objective functions,


--- Page 499 ---

17.6. Reinforcement Learning and the Future of Artiﬁcial Intelligence
477
or reward signals in the case of reinforcement learning, so that optimization produces
the desired results while avoiding undesirable results. We said in Section 17.4 that
reinforcement learning agents can discover unexpected ways to make their environments
deliver reward, some of which might be undesirable, or even dangerous. When we specify
what we want a system to learn only indirectly, as we do in designing a reinforcement
learning system’s reward signal, we will not know how closely the agent will fulﬁll our desire
until its learning is complete. This is hardly a new problem with reinforcement learning;
recognition of it has a long history in both literature and engineering. For example, in
Goethe’s poem “The Sorcerer’s Apprentice” (Goethe, 1878), the apprentice uses magic to
enchant a broom to do his job of fetching water, but the result is an unintended ﬂood due
to the apprentice’s inadequate knowledge of magic. In the engineering context, Norbert
Wiener, the founder of cybernetics, warned of this problem more than half a century ago
by relating the supernatural story of “The Monkey’s Paw” (Wiener, 1964): “... it grants
what you ask for, not what you should have asked for or what you intend” (p. 59). The
problem has also been discussed at length in a modern context by Nick Bostrom (2014).
Anyone having experience with reinforcement learning has likely seen their systems
discover unexpected ways to obtain a lot of reward. Sometimes the unexpected behavior
is good: it solves a problem in a nice new way. In other instances, what the agent
learns violates considerations that the system designer may never have thought about.
Careful design of reward signals is essential if an agent is to act in the real world with no
opportunity for human vetting of its actions or means to easily interrupt its behavior.
Despite the possibility of unintended negative consequences, optimization has been used
for hundreds of years by engineers, architects, and others whose designs have positively
impacted the world. We owe much that is good in our environment to the application
of optimization methods. Many approaches have been developed to mitigate the risk
of optimization, such as adding hard and soft constraints, restricting optimization to
robust and risk-sensitive policies, and optimizing with multiple objective functions. Some
of these approaches have been adapted to reinforcement learning, and more research is
needed to address these concerns. The problem of ensuring that a reinforcement learning
agent’s goal is attuned to our own remains a challenge.
Another challenge if reinforcement learning agents are to act and learn in the real world
is not just about what they might learn eventually, but about how they will behave while
they are learning. How do you make sure that an agent gets enough experience to learn a
high-performing policy, all the while not harming its environment, other agents, or itself
(or more realistically, while keeping the probability of harm acceptably low)? This problem
is also not novel or unique to reinforcement learning. Risk management and mitigation
for embedded reinforcement learning is similar to what control engineers have had to
confront from the beginning of using automatic control in situations where a controller’s
behavior can have unacceptable, possibly catastrophic, consequences, as in the control of
an aircraft or a delicate chemical process. Control applications rely on careful system
modeling, model validation, and extensive testing, and there is a highly-developed body
of theory aimed at ensuring convergence and stability of adaptive controllers designed for
use when the dynamics of the system to be controlled are not fully known. Theoretical
guarantees are never iron-clad because they depend on the validity of the assumptions
underlying the mathematics, but without this theory, combined with risk-management


--- Page 500 ---

478
Chapter 17: Frontiers
and mitigation practices, automatic control—adaptive and otherwise—would not be as
beneﬁcial as it is today in improving the quality, eﬃciency, and cost-e↵ectiveness of
processes on which we have come to rely. One of the most pressing areas for future
reinforcement learning research is to adapt and extend methods developed in control
engineering with the goal of making it acceptably safe to fully embed reinforcement
learning agents into physical environments.
In closing, we return to Simon’s call for us to recognize that we are designers of our
future and not simply spectators. By decisions we make as individuals, and by the
inﬂuence we can exert on how our societies are governed, we can work toward ensuring
that the beneﬁts made possible by a new technology outweigh the harm it can cause.
There is ample opportunity to do this in the case of reinforcement learning, which can
help improve the quality, fairness, and sustainability of life on our planet, but which
can also release new perils. A threat already here is the displacement of jobs caused
by applications of artiﬁcial intelligence. Still there are good reasons to believe that the
beneﬁts of artiﬁcial intelligence can outweigh the disruption it causes. As to safety,
hazards possible with reinforcement learning are not completely di↵erent from those
that have been managed successfully for related applications of optimization and control
methods. As reinforcement learning moves out into the real world in future applications,
developers have an obligation to follow best practices that have evolved for similar
technologies, while at the same time extending them to make sure that Prometheus keeps
the upper hand.
Bibliographical and Historical Remarks
17.1
General value functions were ﬁrst explicitly identiﬁed by Sutton and colleagues
(Sutton, 1995a; Sutton et al., 2011; Modayil, White, and Sutton, 2013). Ring (in
preparation) developed an extensive thought experiment with GVFs (“forecasts”)
that has been inﬂuential despite not yet having been published.
The ﬁrst demonstrations of multi-headed learning in reinforcement learning
were by Jaderberg et al. (2017). Bellemare, Dabney, and Munos (2017) showed
that predicting more things about the distribution of reward could signiﬁcantly
accelerate learning to optimize its expectation, an instance of auxiliary tasks.
Many others have since taken up this line of research.
The general theory of classical conditioning as learned predictions together with
built-in, reﬂexive reactions to the predictions has not to our knowledge been
clearly articulated in the psychological literature. Modayil and Sutton (2014)
describe it as an approach to the engineering of robots and other agents, calling
it “Pavlovian control” to allude to its roots in classical conditioning.
17.2
The formalization of temporally abstract courses of action as options was intro-
duced by Sutton, Precup, and Singh (1999), building on prior work by Parr (1998)
and Sutton (1995a), and on classical work on Semi-MDPs (e.g., see Puterman,
1994). Precup’s (2000) PhD thesis developed option ideas fully. An important
limitation of these early works is that they did not treat the o↵-policy case


--- Page 501 ---

17.6. Reinforcement Learning and the Future of Artiﬁcial Intelligence
479
with function approximation. Intra-option learning in general requires o↵-policy
learning, which could not be done reliably with function approximation at that
time. Although now we have a variety of stable o↵-policy learning methods using
function approximation, their combination with option ideas had not been signif-
icantly explored at the time of publication of this book. Barto and Mahadevan
(2003) and Hengst (2012) review the options formalism and other approaches to
temporal abstraction.
Using GVFs to implement option models has not previously been described. Our
presentation uses the trick introduced by Modayil, White, and Sutton (2014) for
predicting signals at the termination of policies.
Among the few works that have learned option models with function approxi-
mation are those by Sorg and Singh (2010), and by Bacon, Harb, and Precup
(2017).
The extension of options and option models to the average-reward setting has
not yet been developed in the literature.
17.3
A good presentation of the POMDP approach is given by Monahan (1982). PSRs
and tests were introduced by Littman, Sutton, and Singh (2002). OOMs were
introduced by Jaeger (1997, 1998, 2000). Sequential Systems, which unify PSRs,
OOMs, and many other works, were introduced in the PhD thesis of Michael Thon
(2017; Thon and Jaeger, 2015). Extensions to networks of temporal relationships
were developed by Tanner (2006; Sutton and Tanner, 2005) and then extended
to options (Sutton, Rafols, and Koop, 2006).
The theory of reinforcement learning with a non-Markov state representation was
developed explicitly by Singh, Jaakkola, and Jordan (1994; Jaakkola, Singh, and
Jordan, 1995). Early reinforcement learning approaches to partial observability
were developed by Chrisman (1992), McCallum (1993, 1995), Parr and Russell
(1995), Littman, Cassandra, and Kaelbling (1995), and by Lin and Mitchell
(1992).
17.4
Early e↵orts to include advice and teaching in reinforcement learning include
those by Lin (1992), Maclin and Shavlik (1994), Clouse (1996), and Clouse and
Utgo↵(1992).
Skinner’s shaping should not be confused with the “potential-based shaping”
technique introduced by Ng, Harada, and Russell (1999). Their technique has
been shown by Wiewiora (2003) to be equivalent to the simpler idea of providing
an initial approximation to the value function, as in (17.11).
17.5
We recommend the book by Goodfellow, Bengio, and Courville (2016) for discus-
sion of today’s deep learning techniques. The problem of catastrophic interference
in ANNs was developed by McCloskey and Cohen (1989), Ratcli↵(1990), and
French (1999). The idea of a replay bu↵er was introduced by Lin (1992) and used
prominently in deep learning in the Atari game playing system (Section 16.5,
Mnih et al., 2013, 2015).


--- Page 502 ---

480
Chapter 17: Frontiers
Minsky (1961) was one of the ﬁrst to identify the problem of representation
learning.
Among the few works to consider planning with learned, approximate models
are those by Kuvayev and Sutton (1996), Sutton, Szepesvari, Geramifard, and
Bowling (2008), Nouri and Littman (2009), and Hester and Stone (2012).
The need to be selective in model construction to avoid slowing planning is well
known in artiﬁcial intelligence. Some of the classic work is by Minton (1990) and
Tambe, Newell, and Rosenbloom (1990). Hauskrecht, Meuleau, Kaelbling, Dean,
and Boutilier (1998) showed this e↵ect in MDPs with deterministic options.
Schmidhuber (1991a, b) proposed how something like curiosity would result if
reward signals were a function of how quickly an agent’s environment model
is improving. The empowerment function proposed by Klyubin, Polani, and
Nehaniv (2005) is an information-theoretic measure of an agent’s ability to control
its environment that can function as an intrinsic reward signal. Baldassarre and
Mirolli (2013) is a collection of contributions by researchers studying intrinsic
reward and motivation from both biological and computational perspectives,
including a perspective on “intrinsically-motivated reinforcement learning,” to
use the term introduced by Singh, Barto, and Chentenez (2004). See also Oudeyer
and Kaplan (2007), Oudeyer, Kaplan, and Hafner (2007), and Barto (2013).

