2024-11-01T15:50:32.333Z | Secure and AI-Powered Document Processing | Persona

URL: https://withpersona.com/blog/document-ai

 blog Easily screen documents submitted through to verify identity or establish proof of address, wealth, or health. See how Persona can help. Announcements  Published November 01, 2024Last updated January 21, 2026Introducing Document AI, Persona’s AI-powered suite of features for document processingAccelerate decision-making with AI-powered document processing.Lynn Chou     3 min 
  .keytakeaway-swiper .swiper-slide-next {
    opacity: 0.2;
  }
  Key takeaways    Automatically verifying identity documents helps your team accelerate identity-related decision making and make customer satisfaction a priority  Persona’s Document AI solution helps you collect, classify, and capture documents across 90+ countries for KYC, KYB, proof of address, and additional use cases  Our latest AI features unlock the ability to effectively and accurately extract information and transform data into insights      BlogIntroducing Document AI, Persona’s AI-powered suite of features for document processingCopy link

Link copied!
 How long does it take your company to verify a business or an individual’s documents (think bank statements, utility bills, health insurance card, etc.)? In a world that increasingly expects near-instant results, inefficient document processing can cripple your company’s reputation and lead to delays in getting your customers onboarded. Whether you’re a financial platform, insurance company, or any other business that requires document verification, conducting Know Your Business (KYB) or establishing proof of identity, wealth, address, or health is a crucial part of risk mitigation.Unfortunately, collecting and verifying documents within your identity flows is no easy feat. This is especially true when you’re dealing with a million different documents in varying file formats, languages, and structures. On top of that, it can be difficult to juggle providing an easy collection experience for users, navigating high volumes of documents, and making informed business decisions in a timely manner.These challenges can lead to significant delays, increased time spent on manual review, increased operational costs, and frustration for your business and customers. By improving the efficiency and accuracy of document processing, your team can accelerate identity-related decision-making and make customer satisfaction a priority.Introducing Document AI, Persona’s document processing solutionAt Persona, our goal is to help you accelerate decision-making with AI-powered document processing, which is why we built our latest product, Document AI. Document AI helps you easily process documents from around the world, using an automated collection flow. Unlike other solutions, which may be confusing for end users, as well as more manual and rigid, Document AI adapts to your exact business needs with flexible document handling and a smooth user experience.With Document AI, your business can:Collect, classify, and capture documents for any use caseCollect and auto-classify documents from 90+ countries to verify identity for your KYC, KYB, and proof of address, wealth, health, or auto use cases. Document AI offers broad coverage of document types, including, but not limited to, corporate documents, tax forms, bank statements, utility bills, and vehicle registrations. Approve users easily and in real timeReduce friction and user error by making it easy for users to submit supplementary documents with conversion-optimized flows and in-app guidance around how to prevent glare or blur when taking photos of documents. Plus, fully control how you want to verify users – decide which document types to accept, how many submission attempts to allow, and which verification checks are required.Enhance screening capabilities with AI insights for more accurate decisioningCapture, summarize, and compare information from documents quickly with AI insights that help you accurately decide whether to approve, deny, or request additional investigation on a case. If further investigation is needed on a given document, easily review the document and relevant extractions without leaving Persona’s dashboard.Handle more documents, more confidently, with AINo matter where you’re located or what documents you want to verify, Document AI can help by offering both breadth and depth in coverage. Process more documents, spanning countries, languages, formats (structured or unstructured), and types with AI collection and information extraction. Increase confidence and assurance by performing light fraud checks to determine whether the file or image has been tampered with. Then, rely on automated workflows to manage follow up actions.Get started todayVerifying documents within your identity flow shouldn’t be cumbersome or confusing. At Persona, we empower businesses like yours to process documents automatically across 90+ countries while making more business decisions in less time. See how Persona can help.Interested in trying out our solution? Sign up today. 
The information provided is not intended to constitute legal advice; all information
                provided is for general informational purposes only and may not constitute the most
                up-to-date information. Any links to other third-party websites are only for the
                convenience of the reader.
Lynn ChouLynn Chou is a product marketer focused on Persona's startups and healthcare customers. She loves afternoon tea, pilates, and taking her cat on walks.Continue reading(()=>{var e=async t=>{await(await t())()};(self.Astro||(self.Astro={})).only=e;window.dispatchEvent(new Event("astro:only"));})();
