2024-07-23T14:53:17.509Z | Self-Serve IDV with Dynamic Flow for Startups | Persona

URL: https://withpersona.com/blog/dynamic-flow-startups

 blog Building identity flows doesn’t need to be time or resource intensive. See how Persona can help solve your identity challenges with Dynamic Flow for Startups. IdentityAnnouncements  Published July 23, 2024Last updated January 21, 2026Build the onboarding flows you need with our self-serve Dynamic Flow for Startups solutionBuilding identity flows doesn’t need to be time or resource intensive. See how Persona can help solve your identity challenges with Dynamic Flow for Startups.Lynn Chou     6 mins 
  .keytakeaway-swiper .swiper-slide-next {
    opacity: 0.2;
  }
  Key takeaways    Persona is a reliable identity vendor partner for startups of all sizes, and we’re further investing in startups with our Dynamic Flow for Startups solution.  Leverage our existing blueprints, modules, and pre-built components to build and launch faster  Limited developer resources shouldn’t hinder your ability to create a conversion-optimized identity experience – learn how our no-code visual editor and dynamic risk segmentation can help.      BlogBuild the onboarding flows you need with our self-serve Dynamic Flow for Startups solutionCopy link

Link copied!
 As a startup heavily focused on growing your user base, every user counts, which means your worst enemy is a high-friction onboarding flow that turns users away. On the other hand, an onboarding process that is too lenient could be problematic; as an early-stage startup, fulfilling compliance requirements and reducing business risk is also paramount to your growth.In order to balance these seemingly contradictory goals, you’ll need to account for users that differ by location, level of riskiness, and access to documents. Naturally, this means that onboarding journeys need to provide different user paths to orchestrate the appropriate journey for each individual in real time.Building an identity verification program is a daunting task for product teams. Now, sprinkle in the usual startup constraints: limited developer resources, limited compliance expertise, a million other tasks to juggle, and a tight budget, and things get 10x harder.Whether you’re a delivery app or fintech, onboarding users shouldn’t be painful. Persona’s Dynamic Flow for Startups helps startups of all sizes launch their ideal identity verification program quickly and easily. Let’s dig into how this works!Maximize conversion for good users while stepping up friction for bad usersWhile other IDV solutions use rigid, upfront template configurations to provide a “one size fits all” journey for each user, a thoughtful identity verification strategy considers your specific business goals, industry, audience, and risk level. Otherwise, you risk turning away good users (if your default onboarding flow incorporates too much friction) or opening the door to fraudsters (if your flow is too lenient). Dynamic Flow is our innovative solution that can serve different experiences to different users based on risk signals in real time based on easily adjustable conditional logic. What this looks like: if a user from a risky country wants to create an account for your service, you can configure the logic so they see an additional verification step. A user from a low-risk country might receive less friction. Or, a user using an incognito browser might be prompted to do an additional selfie verification on top of government ID verification, while a standard user can just pass through database verification.Why this matters: the flow dynamically adjusts to the risk profile of the user, adding friction where needed while giving less risky users a smooth path so you can maximize conversion while minimizing risk for your business.As you can imagine, the ability to build infinite user paths is both powerful and overwhelming. While Enterprise companies have customer success partners that support them with implementation, startups are often left in the dust, confused about where to start. To remedy this, we’ve launched a robust library of blueprints, pre-set configurations, and pre-built components to enable easier building for the most frequently used identity verification flows requested by startups. Our Startup program includes basic templates for government ID and selfie verification, while our Essential plan might be better suited if you require more customization, such as conditional logic for additional screening or nuanced decisioning.Using these building blocks helps you reap the benefits of Dynamic Flow (deterring bad actors while improving conversion for good ones), while also helping you launch quickly and leverage our out-of-the-box functionality.Have full control over how you build and style flows — without developer resourcesFor product teams at startups with limited developer resources, building and launching quickly poses a large challenge. Oftentimes, each verification tweak or new user path requires precious engineering resources.To combat this and give product teams full control over the identity flow building experience, we’ve released Flow Editor, a no-code visual editor that enables your team to build conversion-optimized flows without being bottlenecked by limited developer resources. With Flow Editor, it’s easy to visualize each path a user may see when they go through your flow — and customize what happens at every stage.Worried about the flow blending in with your company’s look and feel? Our easy-to-use WYSIWYG (What-You-See-Is-What-You-Get) interface allows you to easily add and remove screens, change the theme to match your brand, guide users to different screens depending on their risk level, and configure which verification checks should pass or fail. Need flows for different regions or languages? No problem. With Flow Editor, you can manage language translations and build localized experiences for users.This startup-friendly tool gives you the power to build any kind of flow tailored to your business specifications so your team can build and launch faster.Optimize your flow for conversionEvery point of friction, however minor, can deter users from completing your flow. We often see user drop-off when there are too many required steps, confusing UI, or a lack of guidance around how to upload an ID or complete selfie verification. But without a way to dive deeper into what’s causing drop-off, trying to solve the problem can be like throwing spaghetti at a wall… only, in this instance, that wall is your product experience and spaghetti is your company’s resources.At its core, Dynamic Flow is optimized for conversion. Selfie flows, for example, are based on best practices we’ve learned over the years. Designs are WCAG compliant.With Simulate, you can preview your flow inside Flow Editor before publishing. This makes it easy to test different user inputs like a specific ID or certain scenarios like a failed verification check to see what different users may experience. With Analytics, you can understand how your users progress through the flow with metrics like Started Rate, Finished Rate, and Expiration Rate. Get more granular by analyzing funnel metrics to see which screens in your flow see the largest drop-off, which can indicate a point of friction or confusion.Then you can use these insights to quickly iterate on your flow with our no-code visual editor to better meet your users’ needs.Case studySee how Twilio uses Dynamic Flow to stay on top of changing regulationsRead now‍Tap into self-guided learning resources designed for startupsAs our startup audience continues to grow, we’ve expanded our resources in Persona Academy to support you on your unique growth journey. Whether you’re new to KYC or you’re looking to deepen your product knowledge, our team has put together bite-sized informational videos and tutorials designed to support you in building out your optimal identity verification process. We also offer marketplace- and fintech-specific guidance in our “KYC for different startup verticals” lesson.Plus, brush up on the concepts we mentioned above, such as configuring your Dynamic Flow or navigating through Flow Editor to ensure you’re taking advantage of everything our Dynamic Flow for Startups solution has to offer.Get started todayBuilding identity flows doesn’t need to be time or resource intensive. At Persona, we empower startups like yours to quickly launch self-serve identity verification flows so you can convert more good users while minimizing risk.Interested in trying out our solution? Sign up today to see what Persona can do for you. 
The information provided is not intended to constitute legal advice; all information
                provided is for general informational purposes only and may not constitute the most
                up-to-date information. Any links to other third-party websites are only for the
                convenience of the reader.
Lynn ChouLynn Chou is a product marketer focused on Persona's startups and healthcare customers. She loves afternoon tea, pilates, and taking her cat on walks.Table of contentsMaximize conversion for good users while stepping up friction for bad usersHave full control over how you build and style flows — without developer resourcesOptimize your flow for conversionTap into self-guided learning resources designed for startupsGet started todayContinue reading(()=>{var e=async t=>{await(await t())()};(self.Astro||(self.Astro={})).only=e;window.dispatchEvent(new Event("astro:only"));})();
