2024-08-21T21:14:32.190Z | Digital Onboarding for Credit Unions: IDV Best Practices

URL: https://withpersona.com/blog/digital-onboarding-for-credit-unions

 blog Learn how credit unions can leverage online identity verification tools to prevent fraud, streamline onboarding and enhance member experience with Persona. Identity Finance/fintech Published August 21, 2024Last updated January 12, 2026Digital onboarding for credit unions: IDV best practicesLearn how credit unions can leverage online identity verification tools to prevent fraud, streamline onboarding, and enhance the member experience.Joshua Rodriguez     6 min 
  .keytakeaway-swiper .swiper-slide-next {
    opacity: 0.2;
  }
  Key takeaways    Credit unions that attract younger members generally offer digital onboarding.  Partnering with a vendor to collect and verify user identities online may be easier than you think.   Beyond an improved member experience, digital identity verification can help you save time, improve fraud detection, and help prevent account takeovers.      BlogDigital onboarding for credit unions: IDV best practicesCopy link

Link copied!
 Credit unions focused on growing membership already know that letting people onboard and manage their account digitally is important. Ask a younger person to visit your local branch and complete a paper application and you’ll likely get an eye roll in response — at best. Shifting your entire onboarding process to digital might be too large of a lift to tackle all at once. Instead, let’s focus on a hurdle that could be (relatively) easy to jump: online identity verification (IDV) at onboarding. How does identity verification work?IDV is the process of collecting and verifying identity information about a person to make sure they are who they say they are. In-person verification: At a branch, this might involve asking a new member to show a government-issued photo ID, comparing the image to the person, and verifying that the ID is real. Digital verification: Online, it can happen when you collect identifying information about a person, such as their date of birth and Social Security number (SSN). You then compare it with information from a trusted source, such as a picture of their government-issued ID or a third-party database. IDV is an important part of complying with Know Your Customer (KYC) and anti-money laundering (AML) regulations, which require financial institutions to collect and verify customers’ identities. At a minimum, compliance often involves verifying the customers’ name, date of birth, address, and an identification number. Verifying identity can also help you detect bad actors who might try to open an account with a stolen identity. Or, who try to create synthetic identities to commit fraud. How is digital IDV different?Manual and digital IDV both involve collecting and verifying personal information. A digital IDV process also allows you to gather and analyze various data points based on the information you verify, how the member acts, and the member's device. These are broadly called risk signals, and we break them into several categories:Active signals that are based on information a member provides in response to a fraud or identity check, such as a government ID or selfie. Passive signals that come from information you collect without asking the member for additional information. These might include the member's IP address or browser fingerprint. Or, results from an issuing or authoritative databases check. Behavioral signals, which are a type of passive signal, that depend on how a member interacts with an application or tool, such as whether they copy and paste data, or use autofill. Third-party data from private and government databases, such as credit bureaus and the Social Security Administration. Generally, the process for digital IDV during onboarding looks like:The new member takes or uploads a picture of an approved identifying document, such as a government-issued photo ID. Pre-processing confirms that the image is usable (it’s not too blurry, the full ID is captured, etc.) or asks the person to take or upload a new image. The tool extracts information from the document, such as the person’s name, date of birth, and the ID’s number and expiration date. It then compares the extracted information to what’s on the application and data from third-party databases.The tool monitors passive and behavioral signals for signs of risk, such as an application coming from a device that was previously associated with fraud or a member copying and pasting all the information. Depending on the signals and your risk tolerance, you can approve, deny, or manually review the application.You can ask the member to take a selfie, compare it to the picture from the ID, and run “liveness detection” on the image. The added verification can help detect deepfakes, offer additional signals, and give you more assurance that the applicant is who they say they are. 
   
      ebook
      Learn how to connect signals to stop fraud
   
   
      Get the ebook
      
         
            
         
      
   
How to move from manual to digital IDV at credit unions Credit unions can use digital IDV solutions in different ways depending on their capabilities and preferences. Here’s a progression we see as credit unions digitize document collection and identity verification: Manual (non-digital) review: You collect a potential member’s information from a digital application or at a branch when they apply to open a new account. Then, you manually review the documents and verify their identity offline. Manually send a link: You send new members a link to a digital IDV tool after they submit an application. They use the link to start an online process, Link from the online application: Your online application gives users a link to an IDV tool. The process is similar to manually sending a link after receiving an application, but embedding the link can help onboard new members faster and decrease your team’s workload. Integration with the online application: The IDV solution is integrated into your online application. New members use the tool to upload documents, and you can verify their identity without asking the member to leave your website. The benefits of using digital IDV during onboardingOnline IDV is table stakes if you want to attract new and younger members who prefer digital experiences. But adding members isn’t the only benefit of going digital. Other benefits include:Making things more convenient for members: Allowing members to submit their identity documents from a computer or mobile device can be more convenient than requiring them to come into a branch during business hours. Collecting additional data: You can collect information online that you won’t get from an in-person review, such as a device fingerprint, that can help you stop account takeover attempts. Deterring more fraud: With online IDV, you can run additional verifications in real time. For instance, Social Security numbers and driver’s licenses can be verified against issuing databases to confirm that the information matches what’s in the database. These can help you stop identity thieves and detect synthetic identities. Building trust: You can educate members about how collecting and verifying their identity digitally can help you protect their accounts. Support more types of documents: Online IDV makes it easier to verify identities based on information from foreign databases. This can allow you to confidentially onboard new members who recently arrived in the U.S. or are temporarily visiting for work or school. In short, it can be safer, easier, and faster to verify identities online. Once you have the systems in place, you can also use the same tools to strategically reverify members when there’s a high-risk request. For instance, you might ask members to take a new selfie when they try to change their account information or make a large withdrawal. In-Depth GuideThe 4 questions experts ask when evaluating identity verification solutionsDownload now‍A small step toward digitization can be a big winYour long-run goal may be to create a fully digital onboarding experience, where new members can easily apply for an account, verify their identities, and start using your services without visiting a branch. You may also want to have systems for selectively adding friction based on risk signals to detect and deter bad actors. For example, only requiring medium- to high-risk applicants to submit a selfie. Eventually, you could automate these processes and requests, allowing your team to focus on strategic objectives rather than manually reviewing applications and requests. But these types of digital transformations don’t happen overnight. Starting with a simple step, such as sending new members a link to an identity verification tool, can be a quick way to improve your digital onboarding.How Persona can helpAt Persona, we offer the building blocks that companies use to power their identity verification and fraud prevention processes. You can choose and customize the tools you need to fit your goals and capabilities, including creating branded processes for your members. There are even no-code options for creating and sending links to members to complete the identity verification process. These include various types of verifications, including government ID, document, mobile driver's license, e-passport, phone and email, and selfie verifications. We can also run watchlist, PEP, and adverse media reports. And you can consolidate data from verifications, reports, internal sources, and third parties to manage cases in Persona. With Graph, our link analysis tool, you can spot trends and abnormalities in members’ accounts. Shared data points, such as phone numbers, IP addresses, or device fingerprints, can help you uncover connections and shut down sleeper accounts and fraud rings. We recently partnered with Member Driven Technologies (MDT), a Credit Union Service Organization (CUSO), to help bring these capabilities to credit unions. And we’d love to learn more about your digital account opening process and how Persona might help.You can contact us, get started for free, or try an instant interactive demo to see what your digital onboarding could look like. 
The information provided is not intended to constitute legal advice; all information
                provided is for general informational purposes only and may not constitute the most
                up-to-date information. Any links to other third-party websites are only for the
                convenience of the reader.
Joshua RodriguezJoshua Rodriguez is a product marketing manager at Persona covering fraud and workforce identity. You'll find him around the Bay Area exploring parks and museums with his wife and two kids.Table of contentsHow does identity verification work?How to move from manual to digital IDV at credit unions The benefits of using digital IDV during onboardingA small step toward digitization can be a big winHow Persona can helpContinue reading(()=>{var e=async t=>{await(await t())()};(self.Astro||(self.Astro={})).only=e;window.dispatchEvent(new Event("astro:only"));})();
