2025-09-02T00:00-07:00 | Persona Named a Leader in 2025 Gartner® Magic Quadrant™ for IDV

URL: https://withpersona.com/blog/2025-gartner-magic-quadrant-identity-verification

 blog See why Persona is named a Leader and is positioned highest for Ability to Execute in the 2025 Gartner® Magic Quadrant™ for identity verification. FraudIdentityAnnouncements  Published September 02, 2025Last updated January 21, 2026Persona named a Leader in the 2025 Gartner® Magic Quadrant™ for Identity VerificationSee why Persona is named a Leader and is positioned highest for Ability to Execute in the 2025 Gartner® Magic Quadrant™ for identity verification.Rick Song     4 min BlogPersona named a Leader in the 2025 Gartner® Magic Quadrant™ for Identity VerificationCopy link

Link copied!
 Persona, a leading verified identity platform, today announced that it has been positioned by Gartner as a Leader in the 2025 Gartner® Magic Quadrant™ for Identity Verification. Additionally, Persona is positioned highest for Ability to Execute for the second consecutive year among the 11 vendors evaluated.In the accompanying 2025 Gartner® Critical Capabilities for Identity Verification report, Persona is ranked #1 across five evaluated Use Cases: Risk Mitigation, Consumer, Accessibility, Data Control, and Automation, and #2 in Workforce.Pioneering identity infrastructure for the AI eraAs threats from generative AI accelerate and identity regulations proliferate, organizations are turning to identity infrastructure that can keep pace. Persona offers a robust, customizable platform that helps companies balance fraud prevention, conversion, and compliance by giving them the tools to tailor identity verification to their specific needs, regions, and risk profiles. This flexibility allows customers to build identity flows that prioritize higher conversion for use cases like age assurance while prioritizing higher assurance for use cases like fraud prevention — all within the same platform. As a result, organizations can design the right identity experience for any scenario, from KYC/AML and KYB to fraud detection, age verification, workforce authentication, and more."Our customers are increasingly looking for ways to weave identity verification into every part of the user journey, whether they're stopping fraud at signup, securing their workforces against phishing attacks, or streamlining account recovery," said Rick Song, CEO and co-founder of Persona. "We're honored to be recognized by Gartner as a Leader, as we believe it reflects the investments we've made in deepening our product capabilities and expanding our integrations so businesses can fight AI-driven fraud and keep up with changing regulations without introducing unnecessary friction for real users."Scaling identity infrastructure to meet global demandIn addition to doubling its customer base, Persona has achieved a number of key milestones over the past year, including:Detected over 75 million AI-driven face spoof attempts via advanced liveness detection technology.Expanded international KYB capabilities, helping businesses verify and onboard entities globally while detecting sophisticated impersonation and synthetic fraud.Enhanced age assurance solutions, which have earned global recognition such as certifications from Germany's KJM and the UK's Age Check Certification Scheme (ACCS).Expanded third-party integrations across AI tools, data providers, productivity apps, and IAM and HRIS systems. These integrations enable customers to simplify access control and provisioning with platforms like Okta, Cisco Duo, Microsoft Entra, and Workday, unlock more intelligent workflows and faster decisions through AI, and streamline collaboration and task management through productivity integrations like Jira and Intercom.Raised a $200M Series D at a $2B valuation to build the verified identity layer for an agentic AI world.Looking ahead, Persona remains focused on building the most adaptable and privacy-first identity platform on the market. With advanced data residency options, granular control over data policies, and robust access management baked into its infrastructure, the company continues to set the standard for secure, compliant identity verification.At the same time, Persona is expanding its library of verification types and accessibility features to support more users across a wide range of devices, connection types, and populations. This ongoing investment in new signals and tools underscores Persona's mission to empower organizations to verify more real users and allow them to configure identity flows that help them find their ideal balance between safety, compliance, and user experience.Helping organizations cut through complexityWith over 100 vendors now competing in the identity verification space, it's increasingly difficult for organizations to distinguish between offerings that seem similar on the surface. Gartner evaluations provide an independent view of market dynamics and vendor strengths.We believe Persona's modular platform stands out by empowering organizations to design and configure identity workflows and user experiences to match their use case, risk appetite, and business goals across every stage of the identity life cycle, from data collection to decisioning. This flexibility also ensures teams are prepared for the future, enabling them to adapt quickly as new technologies, regulations, and use cases emerge. Today, customers across industries and regions, from football teams and colleges to airlines, banks, cities, and global platforms like LinkedIn, Block, Okta, and OpenAI use Persona to build verification flows tailored to their unique needs and risk tolerance.Download the 2025 Gartner® IDV reportsIf you’re interested in exploring our recognition in the space, learning how to evaluate IDV vendors, and/or seeing how different vendors compare, you can download both Gartner® reports here. The Magic Quadrant positions vendors in a market, while the Critical Capabilities report provides a deeper dive into the providers’ product and service offerings. We believe companies looking for a solution for their specific needs are best served by reading both reports.We’re also always happy to chat about your identity needs! Contact us to discover how our comprehensive, adaptable identity platform can help you build your ideal identity experience, stay ahead of evolving fraud trends, and meet regulatory requirements today and for many years to come.Gartner, Magic Quadrant for Identity Verification, Akif Khan, Nayara Sangiorgio, James Hoover, 25 August 2025 Gartner, Critical Capabilities for Identity Verification, James Hoover, Akif Khan, Nayara Sangiorgio, 26 August 2025  This graphic was published by Gartner, Inc. as part of a larger research document and should be evaluated in the context of the entire document. The Gartner document is available upon request from Persona. GARTNER is a registered trademark and service mark of Gartner, Inc. and/or its affiliates in the U.S. and internationally, MAGIC QUADRANT and PEER INSIGHTS are registered trademarks of Gartner, Inc. and/or its affiliates and are used herein with permission. All rights reserved. Gartner does not endorse any vendor, product or service depicted in its research publications, and does not advise technology users to select only those vendors with the highest ratings or other designation. Gartner research publications consist of the opinions of Gartner’s research organization and should not be construed as statements of fact. Gartner disclaims all warranties, expressed or implied, with respect to this research, including any warranties of merchantability or fitness for a particular purpose. Gartner Peer Insights content consists of the opinions of individual end users based on their own experiences, and should not be construed as statements of fact, nor do they represent the views of Gartner or its affiliates. Gartner does not endorse any vendor, product or service depicted in this content nor makes any warranties, expressed or implied, with respect to this content, about its accuracy or completeness, including any warranties of merchantability or fitness for a particular purpose. 
The information provided is not intended to constitute legal advice; all information
                provided is for general informational purposes only and may not constitute the most
                up-to-date information. Any links to other third-party websites are only for the
                convenience of the reader.
Rick SongRick Song is a co-founder and CEO at Persona. He is passionate about the future of digital identity and building a better online identity infrastructure.Continue reading(()=>{var e=async t=>{await(await t())()};(self.Astro||(self.Astro={})).only=e;window.dispatchEvent(new Event("astro:only"));})();
