2025-12-02T00:00-08:00 | Identity Verification Built into Your Ashby Hiring Flow with Persona

URL: https://withpersona.com/blog/persona-ashby-integration

 blog Persona's integration with Ashby is built to verify candidates across the entire hiring funnel. Learn how the integration works to prevent candidate fraud. Workforce securityAnnouncements HR technology Published December 02, 2025Last updated February 18, 2026Introducing Persona’s Ashby integrationPersona's integration with Ashby is built to verify candidates across the entire hiring funnel. Learn how the integration works to prevent candidate fraud.Jenna KimJoshua Rodriguez     3 min 
  .keytakeaway-swiper .swiper-slide-next {
    opacity: 0.2;
  }
  Key takeaways    Identity verification helps improve recruiting efficiency, stop security threats in your hiring funnel, and enhance the hiring process.  Persona’s Ashby integration weaves identity verification directly into your existing hiring process, allowing your hiring team to decide when verification should occur during the candidate life cycle.  The result: your talent team spends their time advancing legitimate candidates, while impersonators and other bad actors are filtered out early in the funnel.      BlogIntroducing Persona’s Ashby integrationCopy link

Link copied!
 Hiring teams face a new reality: your recruiters are now the first line of defense against workforce security threats. Gartner predicts that by 2028, one in four candidate profiles worldwide will be fake. Multiple forces are already paving the way for this surge in fake candidate identities.Organized fraud rings (like the DPRK IT groups) and individual bad actors increasingly use GenAI to create realistic applications and real-time deepfakes for remote interviews. The attacks can scale quickly, and some of the deepfakes are getting so good that even full-time fraud fighters can’t detect them visually. Before a candidate even reaches the offer stage, they may have advanced through interview rounds using a synthetic or stolen identity, wasting company resources and distorting candidate pipeline quality along the way.Your talent, recruiting, and HR teams shouldn’t have to spend hours trying to spot bad actors when they need to focus on building a strong talent pipeline. With the right tools and systems, you don’t have to. Persona's plug-and-play integration with Ashby is built to verify individuals across the entire hiring funnel. Identity verification built into your hiring flow within AshbyPersona’s Ashby integration weaves identity verification directly into your existing hiring process. Your hiring team can decide when verification should occur during the candidate life cycle, whether that's before a recruiter screen, ahead of an assessment, during hiring manager interviews, or at the offer stage. From there, Persona will notify the user to verify their identity once they reach the desired stage in Ashby. Once the candidate completes the verification process, their verification status will automatically populate back in Ashby so your hiring team is aware of potential fraudulent activities — keeping Ashby as the main source of truth for hiring pipeline management. Additionally, your people operations teams can review applicants meeting certain thresholds manually in Persona’s intuitive Case dashboard. Teams can access detailed insights on failed verification checks, behavioral analytics, and other suspicious risk signals, like session data or VPN/proxy usage.The result is simple: your talent team spends their time advancing legitimate candidates, while impersonators and other bad actors are filtered out early in the funnel.Learn more about how the integration works here.What this means for talent, HR, and security teamsIdentity verification is now an important part of keeping your organization secure and improving your talent pipeline.Improve recruiting efficiencyFirst, identity verification removes operational drag from the earliest stages of hiring.Manually vetting and interviewing fraudulent candidates consumes valuable time. Verifying identity upfront helps your team reclaim hours of lost productivity and keeps hiring pipelines moving faster, regardless of role type or volume.Stop security threats in your hiring funnelIdentity proofing also strengthens your security posture before candidates ever reach internal systems.Your recruiting team can now prevent insider risks before candidates reach hiring managers or internal systems. Persona’s multi-layered fraud defense catches impersonators using GenAI or stolen identities, preventing them from slipping into the organization. Early verification ensures that only legitimate candidates move past the initial stages.Create a seamless candidate experienceFurthermore, identity proofing enhances the hiring process without complicating the candidate experience.Automated identity checks help candidates move through early stages quickly and confidently — no account creation or paperwork needed. With simple, mobile-friendly flows and fallback options for candidates without smartphones, your hiring team can verify identity upfront without slowing anyone down. Legitimate candidates move forward smoothly, while bad actors quietly fall out.Building stronger identity assurance across the employee lifecycleCandidate identity verification pushes Persona's broader vision forward: delivering stronger identity assurance from the moment someone enters the hiring process, long before they gain access to sensitive internal systems. As distinguishing between real and synthetic identities gets increasingly difficult, Persona’s Ashby integration enables organizations to reduce workforce fraud risk from the first interaction to day one and beyond.Get StartedLearn how our integration with Ashby can help your team efficiently validate candidates. Request a demo or explore our integration.  
The information provided is not intended to constitute legal advice; all information
                provided is for general informational purposes only and may not constitute the most
                up-to-date information. Any links to other third-party websites are only for the
                convenience of the reader.
Jenna KimJenna Kim is a product manager building Persona's third-party integrations marketplace. Outside of work, she can usually be found at the driving range, tennis courts, or park with a book in hand.Joshua RodriguezJoshua Rodriguez is a product marketing manager at Persona covering fraud and workforce identity. You'll find him around the Bay Area exploring parks and museums with his wife and two kids.Table of contentsIdentity verification built into your hiring flow within AshbyWhat this means for talent, HR, and security teamsBuilding stronger identity assurance across the employee lifecycleGet StartedContinue reading(()=>{var e=async t=>{await(await t())()};(self.Astro||(self.Astro={})).only=e;window.dispatchEvent(new Event("astro:only"));})();
