2025-06-17T00:00-07:00 | Integrated Identity Verification and Background Checks with Persona and Yardstik

URL: https://withpersona.com/blog/integrated-background-check-solutions

 blog Improve conversions and reduce risk during onboarding with an end-to-end identity verification and background checks solution from Persona and Yardstik. IdentityAnnouncements Marketplace Published June 17, 2025Last updated March 12, 2026Introducing Persona and Yardstik: Onboard trustworthy workers faster with integrated identity verification and background checksImprove conversions and reduce risk during onboarding with a new end-to-end solution from Persona and Yardstik.Karen Islas      5 min BlogIntroducing Persona and Yardstik: Onboard trustworthy workers faster with integrated identity verification and background checksCopy link

Link copied!
 Marketplaces run on both speed and trust. You need reliable couriers, shoppers, and drivers who will help fulfill customer orders, deliver items, and provide transportation. That starts with onboarding trustworthy people, both quickly and responsibly. To do that, marketplaces typically conduct identity verification (IDV) and background checks. Historically, these processes have lived in separate systems that require risk, operations, and compliance teams to jump between multiple tools. The result is a fragmented workflow: one that slows down decision-making, buries critical information in disparate spreadsheets, and frustrates workers. Marketplaces (and their workers) deserve a smarter approach. That’s why we’re excited to announce our partnership with Yardstik, the technology-first background screening platform, to deliver a unified onboarding flow.Introducing a unified flow for onboarding powered by Persona and YardstikWith Persona and Yardstik, you can now verify worker identities and assess risk through background checks in one seamless experience. By submitting their information in a single flow, your workers can onboard faster.Our out-of-the-box integration with Yardstik screens for criminal background and motor vehicle records (MVR). (If you want deeper insight into your workers, education and employment verifications are coming soon.) Implementation is easy, without long timelines or heavy technical work. It requires only one integration, one procurement process, one contract, and one implementation. This partnership helps you move faster and spend less without compromising on trust. That’s because background checks kick off only after you’ve confirmed the user’s identity. By filtering out obvious bad actors from the start, you can eliminate unnecessary spend on subsequent background screenings. And because background checks are based on verified user information, you ensure data integrity throughout your hiring process. Yardstik’s Sequential Screening approach also runs background checks in a logical order. If a disqualifying factor — like an MVR flag — is detected early, the process stops before moving on to additional checks like a criminal background screen. Instead of paying for every background check upfront, you’ll only pay for the screens that run, saving you time and money.Unify onboarding and automate risk decisions in one placeThe addition of Yardstik’s background-check capabilities is part of Persona’s broader, end-to-end onboarding workflow. Everything runs in one place, which reduces delays and makes the experience smoother for both your users and your team.Here’s how it works. When a user begins identity verification, you can collect the documentation you need and automatically trigger next steps based on their real-time results. Background checks begin as soon as a user successfully verifies themselves. Those results flow directly into Persona and can trigger automated Workflows like account approvals or updates in your system of record, whether it be a CRM or ERP. If you need to manually review, you can use Cases to investigate, assess, and adjudicate. All identity and screening data is tied to a single user profile in Persona, and it’s all within one centralized workspace. Every action, whether automated or handled manually, is logged and easily accessible, making it simple to track decisions and stay compliant as you grow.Improve conversion with a seamless user experienceWhile operational benefits are important for your team, they shouldn’t come at the expense of the end-user experience. Every added step in your onboarding flow increases the risk of drop-off. But even so-called “integrated” solutions typically rely on clunky redirects and multi-step handoffs that disrupt the user experience. Workers expect to onboard quickly, and they’ll switch to competitors that make it easier.That’s why we designed our integrated IDV and background checks solution to be truly seamless. Users move from IDV to background screening in one consistent, branded flow. Once they complete identity verification, their information is used to pre-fill background check forms, cutting down the effort required by the user. It’s an onboarding flow that optimizes for conversion and reduces user error while meeting your standards for compliance.If you require more precision, Persona’s Dynamic Flow lets you tailor onboarding based on specific user attributes. For example, if someone signs up from a suspicious device, you can prompt them for extra documentation before initiating the background check. Meanwhile, lower-risk individuals will continue to move through a faster, lower-friction flow. You can even leverage Persona’s testing tools to test out different variations of the flows to see what performs better with your user population. Build trust from the startThe future of marketplaces depends on their ability to move quickly without compromising trust. That starts with onboarding — one of the most important moments in the worker journey. By unifying identity verification and background checks, we’re empowering platforms to make smarter decisions, onboard workers faster, and build safer communities. It’s an opportunity to get a critical moment right and create a strong foundation for long-term growth.If you're looking to onboard workers faster and drive conversions, we'd love to help. If you're an existing customer, you can start using it right away — just reach out to your account team. New to Persona? Get a personalized demo, chat with our team, or sign up for an account to see how it works. 
The information provided is not intended to constitute legal advice; all information
                provided is for general informational purposes only and may not constitute the most
                up-to-date information. Any links to other third-party websites are only for the
                convenience of the reader.
Karen Islas Karen is a product manager at Persona building a system of record for Operations and Compliance teams through case management, regulatory filing, and third-party integrations. Outside of work, she enjoys studying new languages and hosting supper clubs with friends.Table of contentsIntroducing a unified flow for onboarding powered by Persona and YardstikUnify onboarding and automate risk decisions in one placeImprove conversion with a seamless user experienceBuild trust from the startContinue reading(()=>{var e=async t=>{await(await t())()};(self.Astro||(self.Astro={})).only=e;window.dispatchEvent(new Event("astro:only"));})();
