2025-10-07T00:00-07:00 | Persona Achieves FedRAMP® Moderate Authorized Status

URL: https://withpersona.com/blog/personas-fedramp-status

 blog Persona's fraud prevention and identity verification platform achieves FedRAMP® Moderate Authorized status. FraudAnnouncements Public sector Published October 07, 2025Last updated April 11, 2026Persona’s FedRAMP® Authorized status expands fraud prevention and identity verification options for federal agenciesPersona's comprehensive identity platform has earned FedRAMP® Moderate Authorized status.Timothy Chang     5 min BlogPersona’s FedRAMP® Authorized status expands fraud prevention and identity verification options for federal agenciesCopy link

Link copied!
   On April 10, 2026, Persona for Government received FedRAMP Moderate Authorized status through the 20x pilot program, a modernized process for continuous security validation. Persona was one of 13 cloud service providers in the pilot, and is the first identity verification (IDV) provider to achieve FedRAMP 20x Moderate Authorization.
The previous Moderate Ready status was granted through the traditional application process and remains in effect. The new 20x Moderate Authorized status affirms that Persona for Government’s solutions for fraud prevention, candidate and employee verification, and case management meet even higher security standards.
 Every day, federal agencies are tasked with an enormous responsibility: delivering essential services to millions while safeguarding the public from fraud, waste, and abuse. In a digital-first world, securely and seamlessly verifying identities is foundational to fulfilling that mission.Now, agencies have a new weapon in their arsenal. Persona's comprehensive identity platform has earned FedRAMP® Authorized status at the Low Impact level and is listed on the FedRAMP marketplace. Additionally, Persona recently achieved FedRAMP Ready status at the Moderate Impact level."There aren’t many identity verification providers that offer the public sector a comprehensive and adaptable identity platform," says Robert Kozyra, public sector GTM lead at Persona. "Persona's FedRAMP statuses position us to support federal agencies' digital transformations while maintaining the security and privacy standards that government operations demand."FedRAMP Authorized status means a FedRAMP-recognized third-party assessment organization completed a thorough assessment of Persona’s security and privacy controls and confirmed that Persona’s platform meets the FedRAMP security requirements. How Persona supports government agenciesPersona’s identity platform helps government agencies securely fight fraud, onboard employees and contractors (including business entities), comply with regulatory requirements, and simplify operations — all while safeguarding end-users' confidential information with robust security and privacy controls. Here’s a closer look at why organizations partner with Persona. A highly configurable identity platformWith Persona, you can choose the tools that fit your use case, budget, goals, and technical capabilities. The flexibility allows you to start with the exact solutions that make sense today, knowing you can easily add more features over time.Local and state agencies, higher education institutions, and enterprises partner with Persona for different reasons, but four common use cases include: Automating and optimizing onboarding: Choose from an extensive library of identity verification methods, including government ID, document, selfie, and database checks, plus separate verifications and checks for business entities. Then, leverage Dynamic Flow to automatically approve, block, or send accounts to manual review. With risk-based flows, you can require step-up verifications when you detect signs of risk and offer fallbacks to support people across demographics and technical comfort levels.Defending against the latest fraud attacks: Automatically collect and analyze risk signals, including behavioral, device, and network signals, to spot bad actors. Persona’s unique signals and AI-powered models can help you detect deepfakes, stop bad actors, and keep fraud from scaling. You can also enrich your understanding of individuals and businesses with watchlist, phone, email, and adverse media reports.Verifying employees and contractors: Use Persona’s know your employee (KYE) solution to protect your agency from candidate fraud and account takeovers. Verify applicants, run background checks, and integrate with popular identity access management systems like Cisco Duo, Microsoft Entra ID, and Okta. You can also set up reverification flows to automate account recoveries and require verifications before high-risk actions.Streamlining case management: Quickly build your case management hub with Persona’s drag-and-drop layout editor and templates. Add data from Salesforce, Zendesk, and other popular vendors to create a centralized source of truth to streamline manual reviews, fraud investigations, and activity tracking. Connected risk signals to proactively fight fraudMany organizations struggle to connect data points across their systems. It’s a difficult and expensive challenge to overcome, and bad actors can exploit the resulting blind spots to break into systems and take over legitimate accounts. For example, if you have a point solution for collecting and verifying identity during onboarding, you’ll still need to feed the results into your decisioning engine. You also might need to invest in other tools and orchestration solutions if you want to use the information you gather during onboarding to detect fraudulent activity later. With Persona, you can use internal and external data, triggers, and actions to customize automation logic throughout an account’s life cycle, including onboarding, reverification, and account recovery. Additionally, you can add the risk signals you collect to Graph, Persona’s link analysis tool, to discover and visualize connections between accounts. You can use links to uncover fraud rings, identify shared risk signals, and automatically block new attacks based on those insights.The resulting flywheel effect can help you get ahead of fraud attacks rather than scrambling to defend against fraudsters’ latest tactics.   Gartner positioned Persona as a Leader in the 2025 Gartner® Magic Quadrant™ for Identity Verification. Additionally, Persona is positioned highest for Ability to Execute for the second consecutive year among the 11 vendors evaluated.
In the accompanying 2025 Gartner® Critical Capabilities for Identity Verification report, Persona is ranked #1 across five evaluated Use Cases: Risk Mitigation, Consumer, Accessibility, Data Control, and Automation, and ranked #2 in Workforce.
You can download both Gartner® reports to see how the vendors compare and learn how to evaluate identity verification solutions. 
 A leading partner that puts security first Persona uses multi-layered security mechanisms, coding best practices, third-party audits, access controls, and continuous vulnerability scans to protect against cyberattacks and other threats. Our security and privacy approach is built to meet or exceed federal and global standards and is validated through a range of independent certifications and compliance benchmarks, including:FIPS 140-2 compliance: Cryptographic modules meet federal standards for protecting sensitive information.NIST SP 800-53 compliance: Implementation of federal security controls framework.Kantara IAL2 certification: Identity assurance aligned with NIST SP 800-63-3 standards for digital identity assurance at Level 2.SOC 2 Type II compliance: Independent validation of Persona’s security, availability, and confidentiality controls.ISO 27001 certification: International standard for information security management systems.PCI DSS compliance: Security requirements for handling payment card information.With Persona’s advanced data residency options, agencies also get granular control over data policies, including customizable data access, storage, retention, and redaction policies. Better results for agencies and their constituents Whether you're looking to modernize onboarding, strengthen contractor verification, or implement comprehensive identity solutions, Persona provides the trust, security, and operational efficiency that government missions require.Persona’s identity platform can help your agency reduce fraud, lower operational costs, create user-friendly workflows, and streamline operations. Ready to learn more? Check out our government solutions page or email us directly at [email protected] to discuss how Persona can support your agency's fraud prevention and identity verification needs.Gartner, Magic Quadrant for Identity Verification, Akif Khan, Nayara Sangiorgio, James Hoover, 25 August 2025 Gartner, Critical Capabilities for Identity Verification, James Hoover, Akif Khan, Nayara Sangiorgio, 26 August 2025

 

GARTNER is a registered trademark and service mark of Gartner, Inc. and/or its affiliates in the U.S. and internationally, MAGIC QUADRANT is a registered trademark of Gartner, Inc. and/or its affiliates and is used herein with permission. All rights reserved. Gartner does not endorse any vendor, product or service depicted in its research publications, and does not advise technology users to select only those vendors with the highest ratings or other designation. Gartner research publications consist of the opinions of Gartner’s research organization and should not be construed as statements of fact. Gartner disclaims all warranties, expressed or implied, with respect to this research, including any warranties of merchantability or fitness for a particular purpose.  
The information provided is not intended to constitute legal advice; all information
                provided is for general informational purposes only and may not constitute the most
                up-to-date information. Any links to other third-party websites are only for the
                convenience of the reader.
Timothy ChangTim Chang is Persona's head of privacy and product compliance. When he’s not in the office, you can usually find him playing golf at San Francisco’s local munis.Table of contentsHow Persona supports government agenciesBetter results for agencies and their constituents Continue reading(()=>{var e=async t=>{await(await t())()};(self.Astro||(self.Astro={})).only=e;window.dispatchEvent(new Event("astro:only"));})();
