2025-01-22T22:54:40.727Z | Persona and Mastercard Partnership: How it Works & Benefits

URL: https://withpersona.com/blog/automate-identity-verification-enhance-security-customize-flows-persona-mastercard-identity

 blog Learn how combining Mastercard's risk scores with Persona’s configurable platform helps streamline customer onboarding, mitigate fraud, and simplify operations. IdentityFraudAnnouncements  Published January 22, 2025Last updated January 21, 2026Automate identity verification, enhance security, and customize flows with Persona and MastercardLearn how Mastercard and Persona's partnership can help streamline customer onboarding and mitigate fraud — all while simplifying operations for your team.Joshua Rodriguez     3 min BlogAutomate identity verification, enhance security, and customize flows with Persona and MastercardCopy link

Link copied!
 ‍If you are reading this post, you might already have an identity verification (IDV) process in place where you collect information from users, assess fraud risk, and decide whether to grant platform access.The problem? This process can present several challenges. Manual steps may slow down operations, or you may have to request the same information from all users, regardless of their risk profile. While many identity platforms can confirm if submitted data is valid, verifying whether the individual submitting it is legitimate often requires additional tools. Moreover, solving these issues typically involves integrating multiple solutions.Sound familiar? There is a streamlined solution: combining Mastercard's identity solutions with Persona. Together, they form a unified platform that automates a significant portion of the IDV process, adjusts friction in real time based on user risk scores, and adds extra layers of security and assurance.How it works‍Persona’s identity verification process captures essential user information — such as name, phone number, address, and email — along with passive signals like device data and location. Through its Marketplace integration, Persona strengthens this data by connecting to Mastercard’s identity network’s robust identity assessment capabilities. A key component of this partnership is ensuring that the data used in the process is vetted and reliable, forming the foundation for accurate identity assessment. By leveraging advanced data analysis and risk assessment techniques, the process is dynamically tailored to each user’s risk profile. Data elements assessed with a higher risk score may trigger a request for additional verification, such as government IDs or selfies, while users with data elements assessed as low-risk — with a low probability of being illegitimate — experience a streamlined, low-friction verification process.Remember, each flow can be customized as needed. If a second round of assessment still raises concerns, users can be automatically routed to manual review.Key benefitsMastercard and Persona’s partnership delivers numerous advantages. Users appreciate only having to provide the minimum required information, while security teams gain access to Mastercard’s enhanced data and insights, providing a more comprehensive view of user risk. Meanwhile, product teams can maintain fraud control without negatively impacting user experience or conversions and businesses benefit from managing the entire process on a single platform.Industries and use cases‍The solution provided by this partnership is ideal for industries such as fintech and e-commerce. For example:Fintech: A card-issuing fintech company that faces user drop-off during verification can use Persona + Mastercard's identity solutions to dynamically adjust verification steps based on risk. Legitimate users enjoy a seamless experience, while users for whom data are more limited undergo further authentication checks.E-commerce: An e-commerce platform hosting third-party sellers can use this integration to balance the need for minimal friction during onboarding with the requirement to prevent fraudulent activity. Legitimate sellers receive a smooth experience, while potentially fraudulent actors undergo more thorough verification.Future-proofing your identity verification processesBeyond streamlined customer onboarding and enhanced fraud prevention, the flexibility of this integrated platform ensures your identity verification processes are future-proof. By seamlessly combining behavioral, personal, and device data with real-time payment information and global fraud insights, Mastercard and Persona’s identity solutions offer a thorough and flexible solution for evolving challenges. Continuous updates keep the platform adaptable, enabling you to accommodate new user populations, emerging risks, diverse geographies, and evolving regulations as your business grows.For those involved in IDV, combining Mastercard's identity solutions risk scores with Persona’s configurable platform offers an efficient way to streamline customer onboarding and mitigate fraud, all while simplifying operations for your team.To learn more, reach out to our team — we’d love to chat. 
The information provided is not intended to constitute legal advice; all information
                provided is for general informational purposes only and may not constitute the most
                up-to-date information. Any links to other third-party websites are only for the
                convenience of the reader.
Joshua RodriguezJoshua Rodriguez is a product marketing manager at Persona covering fraud and workforce identity. You'll find him around the Bay Area exploring parks and museums with his wife and two kids.Continue reading(()=>{var e=async t=>{await(await t())()};(self.Astro||(self.Astro={})).only=e;window.dispatchEvent(new Event("astro:only"));})();
