2025-04-10T00:00-07:00 | What is the Age Check Certification Scheme? | Persona

URL: https://withpersona.com/blog/age-check-certification-scheme

 blog Learn how third-party programs like the ACCS certification make it easier to compare age assurance solutions. Age assurance  Published April 10, 2025Last updated April 14, 2026How does the Age Check Certification Scheme help businesses assess age estimation solutions?Learn how third-party certification programs like the Age Check Certification Scheme (ACCS) make it easier to compare age assurance solutions.Kerwell Liao     10 min 
  .keytakeaway-swiper .swiper-slide-next {
    opacity: 0.2;
  }
  Key takeaways    The Age Check Certification Scheme (ACCS) is a third-party testing and certification body that evaluates the accuracy, performance, and effectiveness of age estimation solutions.   Third-party certifications make it easier for businesses to compare the age verification services they are considering in a head-to-head, apples-to-apples way.  Organizations should look for ACCS-certified solutions that offer comprehensive capabilities beyond just establishing someone’s age, including privacy controls, fraud prevention, and the flexibility to adapt to changing requirements.      BlogHow does the Age Check Certification Scheme help businesses assess age estimation solutions?Copy link

Link copied!
 The Age Check Certification Scheme (ACCS) provides businesses with a standardized framework and independent assessment to audit the accuracy and reliability of age estimation solutions (and other related technologies) for regulatory compliance. By offering impartial, standardized testing, ACCS helps businesses cut through vendor claims and confidently adopt age estimation technologies that meet compliance standards and protect minors.As global regulations tighten and public scrutiny around online safety grows, age assurance is a strategic priority. But not all age estimation solutions are created equal, and without independent benchmarks, it’s nearly impossible to assess accuracy, fairness, and effectiveness at scale. That’s where the ACCS tests come in: they bring transparency and accountability to a rapidly evolving space, helping organizations align with standards, avoid regulatory pitfalls, and make smarter technology investments.In this post, we’ll unpack what ACCS tests evaluate, why they matter to your business, and how certifications like these can shape the future of responsible, user-centric age assurance.Age estimation: understanding the regulatory context behind the ACCS certificationIn recent years, we’ve seen a significant shift in how governments approach online safety. This has led to regulations requiring:Age estimation or verification in a variety of industriesGlobal age verification laws in countries around the world The UK's Online Safety Act, the EU's Digital Services Act, Australia’s social media ban, and a number of state-specific laws (and proposals) in the United States all emphasize the obligation of digital service providers to implement age assurance measures that are proportionate to the risk of harming minors. These age estimation or verification regulations share a common goal: foster age-appropriate digital experiences while protecting younger users from potentially harmful content.What makes these regulations particularly noteworthy is their emphasis not just on having age assurance in place, but also ensuring these systems are demonstrably reliable and trustworthy. This is where the ACCS certification becomes indispensable.Read the 2025 regulation guide for online platforms and marketplaces.The challenge of evaluating age checking softwareWhen evaluating age verification services, it’s natural to think that it begins and ends by considering how accurate each solution is. But while age estimation accuracy is an important metric to consider, it isn’t the only one that matters. For example, the ability to easily configure the solution to suit per-region requirements is also key, since age thresholds, allowed assurance methods, and data safeguards (e.g. managing consent and minimizing collection of unnecessary data and redacting collected data that doesn’t need to be kept) differ from one region to another. The ethical provenance of training data and a smooth end-user experience are also important factors to consider.That said, accuracy is still an important factor to take into consideration. However, accuracy claims are difficult to interpret — and can even be misleading — without context around how they were attained. A solution might, for example, claim high accuracy based on limited testing with an unrepresentative sample or different (i.e., more lax) evaluation criteria than other solutions.Key challenges of age verification services that ACCS tests help solveAccuracyDemographic variabilityAdverse scenariosRisk profilesKey challenges in evaluating age checking software include:Demographic variability: Solutions may perform differently across various demographic groups due to inherent biases in training dataAdverse scenarios: Performance can significantly deteriorate in the face of challenging conditions like poor lighting or complex fraud attemptsRisk profiles: Different user segments may require different levels of verification stringencyBefore certifications like those offered by the ACCS, any age estimation vendor could claim that their estimation product was the most accurate on the market, and their test results might have supported that claim. However, no vendor was using the exact same testing sample and procedures, making it difficult to perform apples-to-apples comparisons.What is the Age Check Certification Scheme (ACCS)?The Age Check Certification Scheme (ACCS or sometimes ACC-Scheme) is an independent assessment body that tests and certifies age and identity verification systems. In addition to age verification software — the focus of this article — the ACCS also tests passport scanners, biometric technologies, and other solutions. The ACCS is accredited with the United Kingdom Accreditation Service (UKAS) and consists of data protection experts, certification specialists, and auditors. Because the ACCS has been approved by the UK government as a certification body, businesses looking for compliant solutions can feel confident in their choice when selecting an ACCS-certified solution.The role of independent certification like the ACC-SchemeIndependent certification by third-party organizations like the Age Check Certification Scheme  (ACCS) is essential for businesses evaluating age verification and estimation technologies. The ACCS test provides standardized processes that allow for fair, apples-to-apples comparisons of different solutions.This approach mirrors how the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) in the US enables consumers to compare vehicle fuel efficiency. By using consistent testing methods, the EPA makes it possible to assess fuel economy across manufacturers and models, whether gas-powered or electric. Without such standards, each manufacturer could report efficiency differently, leaving consumers with little ability to compare vehicles accurately.In a world without the EPA's guidelines, buyers would be left to trust manufacturers’ claims or attempt their own costly and time-consuming tests. While some might go to such lengths, most would either accept the numbers at face value or lack the means to validate them.These same dynamics exist in age estimation technology. Without a common benchmark like the ACCS test, it’s difficult to assess the reliability and accuracy of competing solutions. The ACCS ensures that age estimation and verification systems adhere to recognized standards for accuracy, security, and privacy, giving businesses the confidence to make informed decisions.In an era where regulators, like those behind the UK Online Safety Act, demand greater online protections and higher accountability, this certification serves as an independent validation of a vendor’s technical capability and commitment to compliance.The top benefits of the ACCS testThe scheme evaluates the full life cycle of age verification solutions — from the underlying algorithms that power the solution to its data handling and privacy safeguards. This certification is a valuable indicator that a vendor has both the technical depth and operational maturity necessary for high-stakes deployments.The ACCS test provides these benefits:1. Standardized evaluationOne of the primary benefits offered by independent certification bodies like the ACCS is the fact that they evaluate all solution providers against consistent datasets that:Represent diverse demographics and use casesInclude sufficient sample sizes for statistical significanceTest performance under various real-world conditionsThis consistency makes it possible to directly compare multiple age estimation solutions by their accuracy metrics, including Mean Absolute Error, false negative rates, false positive rates, and more. 2. Comprehensive assessmentBecause accuracy isn’t the only metric that matters, most independent certification programs also evaluate other crucial factors that are likely to be important to businesses, including:Data privacy and security practicesData minimization processes to minimize riskBias detection and mitigation in the softwareFraud prevention capabilitiesAccessibility and user experienceIn the same way, a standardized evaluation of accuracy allows businesses to make more direct comparisons between solutions, so too does the standardization of these additional factors — which can be just as important to your goals as accuracy metrics. 3. Regular re-evaluationThe age assurance landscape is constantly evolving. As new technologies (such as the emergence of AI-generated selfies and images) become available, fraudsters increasingly incorporate them into their toolkits — forcing solution providers to adapt. With this in mind, many certification programs, like the ACCS test, require a periodic re-evaluation of solutions to ensure they have maintained their effectiveness despite changing fraud trends and techniques. This makes it easier for businesses to decide whether they need to change providers once they already have one in place. It also gives businesses insight into the long-term trajectory and quality of a solution, which may be an important consideration. What to consider before implementing ACCS-certified technologyAs you build your age assurance and verification program, third-party certifications like the one offered by the ACCS are an important consideration. But it’s important to recognize that it’s just one part of broader, effective age verification strategies. Other factors you should consider include:Multiple verification methodsNo single verification method is perfect for all organizations in all scenarios. Which methods you deploy should be informed by the regulations you are subject to, the jurisdictions you operate in, the expectations of your customers or users, and your organization’s unique risk tolerance. Ultimately, in most circumstances, businesses should consider implementing multiple age assurance methods and applying them with dynamic flows depending on the risk level and context of each user interaction. Contextual factors include:The geographic region a user is in — and the allowed methods for that regionThe type of content or service in questionThe target age group of the user and the likelihood that children may access the content or serviceYour risk tolerance and business objectivesPrivacy by designDepending on the types of age assurance technology you use, you may be collecting (or at least processing) a significant amount of sensitive information from your users. This may include names and dates of birth, government-issued IDs (like driver’s licenses and passports), selfies, and more. With this in mind, whatever age assurance solution you ultimately deploy should be built upon robust privacy principles. This may include:Data minimization, so you’re only collecting the minimum amount of data necessary to achieve the assurance level you needPurpose limitation, so you’re only using the data you collect for a specific and lawful purposeUser consent management, so you’re able to collect and update user consent for the collection and use of their data, as required by many consumer privacy laws, including the GDPR in EuropeAutomatic PII redaction, to ensure sensitive information isn’t inappropriately accessed by others in your organization with no need to access itFraud preventionJust as is the case with identity verification, as age assurance becomes more common, so too will attempts to skirt it. Any solution you are considering should have robust fraud prevention measures, including:Liveness detection and spoof detection, to ensure you’re dealing with a real person or ID — not AI-generated assetsBehavioral analysis, including hesitation detection and other features that can help you gauge the risk associated with each individual sessionLink analysis, which can help you understand how accounts on your platform are linked to one another — including whether or not suspicious links exist, which might point to coordination (such as a single fraudster opening multiple accounts for fraudulent purposes)AdaptabilityYour age assurance program shouldn’t be a set-it-and-forget-it strategy. As the industry and technology continues to rapidly shift, you should be looking for a solution that:Maintains certifications according to the latest standardsAdapts to new and evolving global regulatory requirementsProvides flexible configuration options that give you the freedom to adapt age assurance as necessary for your businessOffers robust privacy controls and fraud prevention capabilities Leverage technology with ACCS certification The Age Check Certification Scheme provides a valuable framework for organizations to evaluate age assurance solutions. That said, certification alone isn't sufficient for an effective age assurance approach. To build effective age assurance programs that protect minors, maintain user privacy, and meet regulatory requirements, organizations should look for age verification software that also offers comprehensive capabilities beyond establishing someone’s age, including privacy controls, fraud prevention, and the flexibility to adapt to changing requirements.At Persona, we’ve built a flexible age assurance solution that balances compliance, conversion, and privacy. From government ID and database verification to Selfie Age Estimation and Reusable Personas, you can tailor methods to user context while automating consent, data collection, and retention.Our Selfie Age Estimation is now certified by the Age Check Certification Scheme (ACCS), which accurately estimated 98% of 18-year-olds as under 25. This independent validation reinforces our ability to help businesses meet stringent age assurance regulations like the UK’s Online Safety Act.To stay ahead in a shifting regulatory landscape, our teams:Track evolving standards (Ofcom, ISO/IEC DIS 27566-1, etc.)Participate in trials like Australia’s Age Assurance Technology evaluationUndergo independent testing with ACCS, KJM, iBeta, NIST, and moreWant to get age assurance right? Contact a Persona expert today. 
The information provided is not intended to constitute legal advice; all information
                provided is for general informational purposes only and may not constitute the most
                up-to-date information. Any links to other third-party websites are only for the
                convenience of the reader.
Kerwell LiaoKerwell is a product marketing manager focused on Persona’s identity verification solutions. He enjoys watching basketball and exploring the world with his German Shepherd.Table of contentsAge estimation: understanding the regulatory context behind the ACCS certificationThe challenge of evaluating age checking softwareWhat is the Age Check Certification Scheme (ACCS)?The role of independent certification like the ACC-SchemeThe top benefits of the ACCS testWhat to consider before implementing ACCS-certified technologyLeverage technology with ACCS certification Continue reading(()=>{var e=async t=>{await(await t())()};(self.Astro||(self.Astro={})).only=e;window.dispatchEvent(new Event("astro:only"));})();
