2025-07-08T08:00-07:00 | Persona Named a Leading Vendor in Liminal’s 2025 BEV Index

URL: https://withpersona.com/blog/persona-named-leading-vendor-in-liminals-link-index-for-business-and-entity-verification

 blog Liminal ranked Persona a top KYB provider in its 2025 Business Entity Verification Link Index. See how our solution helps teams fight fraud and stay compliant. Announcements  Published July 08, 2025Last updated January 28, 2026Persona named a Leading Vendor in Liminal's Link Index for Business and Entity VerificationLiminal ranked Persona a top KYB provider in its 2025 Business Entity Verification Link Index. See how our solution helps teams fight fraud and stay compliant.Neel BhoopalamShana Vu     5 min BlogPersona named a Leading Vendor in Liminal's Link Index for Business and Entity VerificationCopy link

Link copied!
 At Persona, we’ve always believed Know Your Business (KYB) is about more than fulfilling a compliance requirement. What began with foundational checks, like EIN verification and watchlist screening, has evolved into a comprehensive platform that now powers DAC7 and INFORM Act compliance, real-time fraud prevention, and global entity onboarding for hundreds of organizations.This evolution wouldn’t have been possible without the customers who’ve shaped our journey — from fintechs like Branch to marketplaces like GetYourGuide and global platforms like Twilio. Each has pushed us to think bigger about how business verification should work: at scale, across borders, and in step with growing regulatory complexity.Together with our customers, we’ve pushed the boundaries of what KYB can and should do, and that continued innovation hasn’t gone unnoticed. We’re proud to share that Persona has been named a Leading Vendor in Liminal’s Link Index for Business and Entity Verification, recognized for our leadership at the intersection of product execution and strategic vision.However, this recognition extends beyond a product milestone. It reflects a broader shift happening across industries: KYB has evolved from a regulatory requirement to a business-critical capability.From checkbox to cornerstone: KYB’s new roleWhile Liminal uses the term Business and Entity Verification (BEV) in its landmark report, BEV is essentially the same process many refer to as Know Your Business (KYB): verifying that a business and the individuals behind it are real and trustworthy. What stood out in the report is how much this space has grown and how much more is now expected of KYB solutions.Liminal highlights three key trends shaping the future of business verification:A more complete view of business identity: It’s no longer enough to simply match a business to a registry. Teams need to evaluate ownership structures, verify documents, assess online presence, and understand who’s behind the business.Rising fraud risks in global commerce: As more transactions move online and across borders, so do bad actors. Shell entities, synthetic businesses, and complex ownership webs are becoming new threats to contend with during the KYB process. More regulatory pressure across industries: New requirements like DAC7 and the Digital Services Act are pushing more businesses — not just financial institutions — to collect, validate, and report information about the entities they work with.These insights reinforce something we’ve seen firsthand: KYB is no longer a narrow compliance task; it’s a strategic capability for any organization working with other businesses.Persona recognized as a Leading Vendor in Business Entity Verification for both Strategy and ExecutionAs KYB evolves into a business-critical function, it’s validating to see our approach recognized — not just for innovation, but for the execution required to meet real-world complexity.Out of 127 vendors evaluated, only 20 were recognized in the final BEV Link Index. Persona was one of the few to lead in both Strategy and Product Execution. Liminal’s report highlighted the flexibility and completeness of our solution, calling out the following in particular:Integrated identity infrastructure. We were the first to unify KYB, KYC, and fraud detection in a single system, helping teams break down silos and get a complete view of entity risk in one place.Highly configurable and modular. Our customers use our building-blocks approach to design KYB and KYC processes that fit their specific needs, then automate them with workflows that can be customized by region, use case, or risk profile.Multi-layered verification and automation. We pull from government records, KYC data, and business signals to give teams a more complete view of legitimacy while enabling automated risk flagging to catch fraud early.Built for scale and global compliance. Our platform supports industry- and region-specific solutions focused on requirements like FINTRAC and DAC7 so our customers can grow and stay compliant wherever they operate.Persona stands out in its ability to serve a broad set of industries with an integrated, end-to-end platform for KYB and KYC. Its modular approach gives teams the flexibility to tailor verification to regional requirements, risk profiles, and onboarding workflows — making it a strong fit for everything from nascent business verification programs to global merchant onboarding.- Filip Verley, Chief Innovation Officer at LiminalThe future of our KYB platformWhile KYB needs may look different across our customers, their core challenges remain the same: verify businesses quickly, meet evolving compliance requirements, and stay ahead of fraud and risk. That’s why we’re continuing to invest in capabilities that make those outcomes possible:Seamless collection: Whether you’re onboarding large enterprises or sole proprietors, we’re making it easier for businesses to verify themselves with collection experiences designed to streamline business onboarding.Global scale, with more ways to say yes: As more businesses operate across borders, we’re continuing to expand our global coverage and further localize data sources so teams can confidently approve the right businesses wherever they operate.Smarter automation through AI: We’re rethinking how AI can support KYB, not just by improving accuracy but by streamlining decisioning while keeping transparency and control at the center of every review.We’ll continue to bring all of these aspects together in our unified platform for KYB and KYC. By verifying both businesses and the people behind them, and building smarter ways to collect, understand, and act on that identity data, we’re creating a KYB experience that grows with your business, no matter the industry, use case, or region.Access Liminal’s 2025 Link Index for Business and Entity VerificationIf you're evaluating BEV/KYB vendors or thinking about how your program may need to grow in the year ahead, be sure to check out Liminal’s 2025 report. And if you want to see how Persona can help with your KYB process, we’d love to chat. Get in touch or explore our KYB solution today.  
The information provided is not intended to constitute legal advice; all information
                provided is for general informational purposes only and may not constitute the most
                up-to-date information. Any links to other third-party websites are only for the
                convenience of the reader.
Neel BhoopalamNeel is a product manager at Persona on the KYB team. He’s a smoothie enthusiast that loves to ski, play tennis, and dabble with pickleball from time to time.Shana VuShana is a product marketing manager focused on the Persona platform and marketplaces. You can usually find her running around San Francisco with a coffee in hand.Table of contentsFrom checkbox to cornerstone: KYB’s new rolePersona recognized as a Leading Vendor in Business Entity Verification for both Strategy and ExecutionThe future of our KYB platformAccess Liminal’s 2025 Link Index for Business and Entity VerificationContinue reading(()=>{var e=async t=>{await(await t())()};(self.Astro||(self.Astro={})).only=e;window.dispatchEvent(new Event("astro:only"));})();
