2025-11-04T00:00-08:00 | Reflections from MWC Las Vegas 2025: Verified Identity is Pivotal for Trust in Communications

URL: https://withpersona.com/blog/mwc-las-vegas-2025-recap-verified-identity-pivotal-for-trust-communications

 blog At Mobile World Congress, three shifts in identity verification stood out. Here's what telecom leaders need to know to maintain trust and fight fraud at scale. Identity  Published November 04, 2025Last updated January 21, 2026MWC Las Vegas 2025 recap: Verified identity is pivotal for trust in communicationsAt Mobile World Congress, three shifts in identity verification stood out. Here's what telecom leaders need to know to maintain trust and fight fraud at scale.Kyra John     3 min BlogMWC Las Vegas 2025 recap: Verified identity is pivotal for trust in communicationsCopy link

Link copied!
 As Persona’s telecom lead, I've spent much of my career speaking to communications platform as a service (CPaaS) and network providers about verification and consumer protection in the wireless industry. Sometimes, it felt rare to see the telecom and identity worlds truly intersect at industry events, but at this year’s Mobile World Congress Las Vegas, that intersection was impossible to miss.MWC’s ConnectMobile program (hosted by CTIA) is one of North America’s premier gatherings for carriers, CPaaS providers, and messaging innovators. It was my first industry event since joining Persona, and it confirmed what I’ve believed for a long time: Telecom and identity are converging in ways that will define the next era of communication.Across every panel and conversation, one message stood out: Verified identity is the foundation for maintaining consumer trust in a branded, AI-driven world.RBM is here, and verified identity will determine its successRCS Business Messaging (RBM) is the next evolution of texting. It allows businesses to message customers using verified sender names, logos, and interactive media directly in their native messaging client. For consumers, RBM feels more innovative and engaging. For brands, it opens a powerful new channel for connection.But with that opportunity comes risk. The same features that make RBM engaging also create openings for impersonation and fraud. As more than 33 million US businesses look to adopt this channel, the industry must ensure that every sender within this channel is legitimate.High-assurance, scalable KYB verification will be critical to making that possible. Many conversations at ConnectMobile focused on how to verify businesses efficiently and effectively — particularly small and midsize ones — without introducing unnecessary friction.AI is transforming both the innovation and fraud landscape Two of Persona’s leaders, Alex Yen, VP of product architecture, and Christie Kim, chief operating officer, joined panels on how AI is reshaping digital trust.Alex explored the rise of autonomous agents and AI-generated content, often described as the “Dead Internet Theory.” As channels like RBM become more automated, verifying that the business or person on the other end is authentic will be key to maintaining trust.Christie discussed the other side of the equation: AI-enabled fraud. Fraudsters are using generative tools to impersonate brands, automate phishing campaigns, and exploit verification systems at scale. As she emphasized, combating these threats requires a multilayered approach that blends identity, behavioral, and contextual signals rather than relying on a single model or manual review.CPaaS providers can drive scalable, trusted growthSpeed and scale have always defined the telecom industry’s innovation, but its verification methods have sometimes lagged behind. With tighter FCC enforcement regimes and an expanding fraud landscape, trust has become the new standard for sustainable growth.As RBM adoption accelerates, CPaaS providers are uniquely positioned to embed verification directly into onboarding and registration workflows. By building automated, configurable systems, they can ensure every message originates from a trusted source before it reaches the consumer. The companies that can deliver trust at the speed and scale telecom demands will define the next era of communications.  Looking aheadThe future of RBM is already here, backed by carriers, Google, and the broader CPaaS ecosystem. For it to scale responsibly, identity must become a foundational layer of rich communications, not an afterthought.I'm excited to see this shift finally take shape. The next generation of communication channels is about ensuring every connection can be trusted — and Persona is leading the wayLearn how Persona is helping telecom leaders, CPaaS providers, and enterprises build trusted communication ecosystems that keep users safe and engaged. 
The information provided is not intended to constitute legal advice; all information
                provided is for general informational purposes only and may not constitute the most
                up-to-date information. Any links to other third-party websites are only for the
                convenience of the reader.
Kyra JohnKyra John is a deployment lead at Persona focused on our telecom industry vertical. You’ll catch her running around DC’s museums and coffee shops, petting every dog she meets. Table of contentsRBM is here, and verified identity will determine its successAI is transforming both the innovation and fraud landscape CPaaS providers can drive scalable, trusted growthLooking aheadContinue reading(()=>{var e=async t=>{await(await t())()};(self.Astro||(self.Astro={})).only=e;window.dispatchEvent(new Event("astro:only"));})();
