2025-09-29T00:00-07:00 | Persona Named a Leader in the 2025 Forrester Identity Verification Solutions Report

URL: https://withpersona.com/blog/persona-named-leader-forrester-wave-identity-verification-solution-report

 blog Among 15 vendors evaluated, Persona received the highest scores in both the current offering and strategy categories. IdentityFraudAnnouncements  Published September 29, 2025Last updated January 21, 2026Persona named a Leader in the 2025 Identity Verification Solutions ReportAmong 15 vendors evaluated, Persona received the highest scores in both the current offering and strategy categories.Rick Song     3 min BlogPersona named a Leader in the 2025 Identity Verification Solutions ReportCopy link

Link copied!
 Persona, a leading verified identity platform, today announced it has been named a Leader in The Forrester Wave™: Identity Verification Solutions, Q3 2025. In addition to receiving the highest scores in both the current offering and strategy categories out of 15 vendors evaluated, Persona received the highest scores possible in the Vision, Innovation, Deepfake Detection, and Business Identity Verification (Know Your Business) criteria.This evaluation comes on the heels of Persona also being named a Leader in the 2025 Gartner® Magic Quadrant™ for Identity Verification, where the company was positioned highest for Ability to Execute for the second consecutive year. Rick Song, co-founder and CEO of Persona, said, "As AI-powered fraud grows more sophisticated and global regulations tighten, organizations can no longer rely on rigid, one-size-fits-all identity tools. Persona was built to adapt across industries, use cases, and regions, whether you’re verifying individuals’ ages in Australia or complex business entities in the US. We believe being named a Leader by both Forrester and Gartner highlights how Persona is empowering organizations with the flexibility they need to keep up with the evolving identity landscape."Forrester’s evaluation of PersonaThis evaluation assessed vendors on their current offering, strategy, and customer feedback. According to the report, “Persona’s solution is a good fit for heavily regulated enterprises with extensive and complex requirements for document-based ID verification.”Persona was also recognized for its flexibility, innovation, and robust feature set across both individual and business verification. Specifically, Forrester recognized Persona’s:Vision, Innovation, and Roadmap: Persona received the highest scores possible in the vision, deepfake detection, and roadmap criteria. Persona’s solution includes custom risk models, cross-org data sharing, and AI agents for customer support.Physical Identity Verification (PIDV): The identity platform was recognized for advanced tools like liveness detection, Deepfake Detection, and age estimation.Business Identity Verification (KYB) and Case Management: Forrester evaluated Persona as a highly flexible and robust solution for organizations to verify complex business entities and streamline investigations.Customer feedback in the report also cited Persona’s scalability and the ease of integrating its orchestration workflows into existing systems.Future-ready identity for an evolving worldAs fraud tactics evolve and regulations grow more complex, organizations need an identity platform that can adapt and scale. Persona’s unified identity infrastructure is built for this challenge, offering configurable building blocks to help organizations meet rigorous compliance needs and stay ahead of emerging threats.Persona supports a wide range of identity use cases, from age and workforce identity verification to helping organizations meet complex requirements in heavily regulated environments. With a robust library of risk signals, flexible orchestration tools, and seamless third-party integrations, Persona empowers organizations to:Verify individuals and entities across geographies and use casesAdapt to AI-powered fraud with evolving risk intelligenceDeliver secure, seamless identity experiences that build trustMaintain compliance with confidence using customizable, auditable workflowsIndependent evaluations from research firms like Forrester and Gartner equip enterprises with trusted insight into which solutions can truly scale. We believe these recent recognitions reflect Persona’s ongoing investment in solving both today’s and tomorrow’s identity challenges.To read the full evaluation, access the 2025 Forrester Wave™: Identity Verification Solutions, Q3 2025 here.Disclaimer: Forrester does not endorse any company, product, brand, or service included in its research publications and does not advise any person to select the products or services of any company or brand based on the ratings included in such publications. Information is based on the best available resources. Opinions reflect judgment at the time and are subject to change. For more information, read about Forrester's objectivity here. 
The information provided is not intended to constitute legal advice; all information
                provided is for general informational purposes only and may not constitute the most
                up-to-date information. Any links to other third-party websites are only for the
                convenience of the reader.
Rick SongRick Song is a co-founder and CEO at Persona. He is passionate about the future of digital identity and building a better online identity infrastructure.Continue reading(()=>{var e=async t=>{await(await t())()};(self.Astro||(self.Astro={})).only=e;window.dispatchEvent(new Event("astro:only"));})();
