2026-04-27 | Introducing Atlas: A Free Age Assurance Legislation Tracker

URL: https://withpersona.com/blog/introducing-atlas-global-age-regulation-tracker

 blog Persona Atlas is a free, collaborative database and API designed to help compliance teams navigate the complex landscape of age assurance and privacy laws. AnnouncementsCompliance InternationalAge assurance Social mediaAdult entertainmentDatingGaming Published April 27, 2026Last updated April 27, 2026Introducing Atlas: a global age regulation trackerPersona Atlas is a free, collaborative database and API designed to help compliance teams navigate the complex landscape of age assurance and privacy laws.Brandon Chen     2 min 
  .keytakeaway-swiper .swiper-slide-next {
    opacity: 0.2;
  }
  Key takeaways    Track age regulations and more: Atlas is a free, dedicated global database to help compliance teams track age assurance legislation and intersecting data privacy regulations.  Built for programmatic integration: Atlas’ API allows organizations to plug its regulatory data directly into their existing Governance, Risk, and Compliance (GRC) platforms or engineering workflows.  Made for collaboration: Atlas operates as a "living resource." We invite industry professionals to contribute updates and help keep the database accurate.      BlogIntroducing Atlas: a global age regulation trackerCopy link

Link copied!
 Over 300 age-related bills were introduced across several US states in 2025 alone. We’ve heard firsthand from numerous legal and compliance teams that keeping up with these regulations is incredibly overwhelming. That’s why we developed Atlas, a global database tracking evolving age assurance regulations. Atlas tracks recent legislation impacting social media platforms, adult content, age-restricted services, and other related legislation.We started Atlas as an internal resource to help customers navigate complex compliance requirements across jurisdictions. When we saw how much they benefited from having this information to reference as they created their age assurance solutions, we decided to make it public.Atlas is the first collaborative age regulatory database of its kind. Industry professionals, from regulators to legal and compliance teams, can contribute updates to help keep the database accurate and current. What’s in Atlas and how it worksAtlas is completely free to use. Its API allows for seamless integration directly into your organization's existing Governance, Risk, and Compliance (GRC) platforms or engineering workflows.For each regulation, Atlas offers a description, effective dates, additional resources to learn more, and direct links to government websites where you can read the full legislation.  You can explore the database a few different ways: Visual explorer: Use the 3D interactive globe to see jurisdictional overlap and understand which regions’ laws apply to you. Table view: Switch to a table view to assess regulations at a glance.Targeted filters: Browse by current legislative status or specific regions, countries, or states.Applying age assurance requires an understanding of data privacy principles.  That’s why Atlas also includes a growing library of intersecting privacy regulations, helping your compliance teams get a complete picture of your obligations.An important note: Atlas is an informational resource and not legal advice. Because state-level bills change so rapidly, we intentionally filtered out early-stage proposals to focus your team on actionable, passed legislation. Above all, our goal is to help you cut through the noise with a reliable source for current regulation.What’s next for navigating age assuranceAs age assurance regulations change, we're continually refining Atlas to better serve compliance professionals. In the coming weeks, Atlas will cover intersecting data privacy laws and adjacent technical requirements like evolving VPN restrictions.We invite you to explore the database and share your comments. To collaborate with our team, submit regulatory updates, or ask questions, simply click the link in the top-right corner of the Atlas platform or email [email protected]. 
The information provided is not intended to constitute legal advice; all information
                provided is for general informational purposes only and may not constitute the most
                up-to-date information. Any links to other third-party websites are only for the
                convenience of the reader.
Brandon ChenOriginally from Taiwan, Brandon Chen is a California resident who loves to go fishing. By day, he works on the product marketing team.Table of contentsWhat’s in Atlas and how it worksWhat’s next for navigating age assuranceContinue reading(()=>{var e=async t=>{await(await t())()};(self.Astro||(self.Astro={})).only=e;window.dispatchEvent(new Event("astro:only"));})();
