2026-01-14 | Persona's Graph Fights Sophisticated and Scaling Fraud

URL: https://withpersona.com/blog/6-ways-personas-graph-helps-you-fight-sophisticated-and-scaling-fraud

 blog Here are six ways that Persona's Graph helps you fight sophisticated and scaling fraud.  FraudAnnouncements  Published January 14, 2026Last updated January 24, 20266 ways Persona's Graph helps you fight sophisticated and scaling fraud Modern fraud is too complicated to detect with individual signals or point solutions. Persona's Graph adds real-time link analysis to your investigations and decisioning. Louis DeNicola     6 min 
  .keytakeaway-swiper .swiper-slide-next {
    opacity: 0.2;
  }
  Key takeaways    Graph’s real-time insights can catch and block fraud within hundreds of milliseconds instead of hours later or during overnight batch processing. The data also syncs across Persona’s platform in real time, allowing fraud fighters to transition from investigation to interception without switching tools.  The no-code setup allows you to easily add and normalize proprietary data to create custom nodes and uncover hidden connections that are important to your use case.   Cross-environment Graph helps you catch fraudsters targeting multiple parts of your business. You can also form secure cross-environment partnerships with similar organizations to detect and prevent coordinated fraud attacks.  Graph’s image similarity checks can even catch advanced fraudsters and fraud rings that know how to hide device and IP signals.      Blog6 ways Persona's Graph helps you fight sophisticated and scaling fraud Copy link

Link copied!
 For fraud fighters, link analysis tools like Persona’s Graph are becoming essential for stopping account sharing, deepfakes, identity mules, and other forms of sophisticated or scaling fraud attacks. Since we launched Graph in early 2023, we’ve spent countless hours gathering feedback from customers, investigating the latest fraud vectors, and testing new technology. Graph is a better product as a result, and we want to share six improvements that are helping fraud fighters today.1. Run complex queries 4x faster for real-time insights Complex, multi-connection queries run at least four times faster, and database syncing is 10x more efficient than when we first launched. In contrast, some link analysis tools batch process data syncs each night. Having real-time insights is crucial for quickly making decisions about a suspicious user or action. But the benefits don’t stop there. For many organizations, Graph powers a conditional step in verification and reverification flows, flagging high-velocity attacks and automatically blocking users connected to known bad actors. They can’t do this without creating conversion-killing friction unless they have real-time data syncing. 
   
      On-demand webinar
      See how Handshake AI uses link analysis and Persona's Graph to fight fraud
   
   
      Watch now
      
         
            
         
      
   
2. Create custom nodes to catch fraud that’s unique to your businessYou can use Persona’s no-code Importers tool to add data to Persona from multiple industry-standard sources, such as S3 and Snowflake. The Persona platform helps validate and normalize the information. You can also add data from third-party partners available in the Persona Marketplace, including SentiLink, Chainalysis, MX, and Mastercard.Then, you can use the data you added to create custom nodes. With Graph, you can find links to these nodes, or properties, and uncover suspicious and fraudulent activity. For example: If you work at an online marketplace, you could use promo codes as nodes to detect and stop promotion abuse. Or, if you work at an ecommerce platform or fintech, you might use hashed payment information and crypto addresses as nodes to identify fraud rings or money laundering. Custom nodes from proprietary data points can be especially helpful for fraud detection because they’re specific to your use case and less likely to be part of previous data breaches.3. Detect sophisticated fraud with more signals and nodesIn addition to custom nodes, Graph can automatically use Accounts in the Persona platform and information you collect when users go through Persona’s verification checks as nodes. This data includes the user’s contact information and passive signals, such as device, network, and behavioral signals from mobile and browser sessions. Some of the most popular nodes for detecting large and sophisticated fraud include: Device token: Persona generates a unique identifier associated with the device. Device fingerprint: Persona gathers or calculates a device fingerprint from mobile app vendor IP libraries or based on over 100 browser and device data points. IP address: Persona collects the user’s IP address and related diagnostic information, such as whether the IP is associated with a VPN. Various types of image similarity: Persona can compare different images that users submit, including selfies and IDs, and identify accounts that submit similar images. These can be especially effective at detecting deepfakes, identity mules, and fraud rings. “Image similarity is always interesting,” says Ashley Fang, a fraud product analyst at Persona. “The most advanced fraudsters know how to hide or spoof a lot of passive signals, so one of the best ways to find them is through image similarity checks with Graph.”4. Investigate faster and automate decisions with quality-of-life upgradesWe continually focus on making a beautiful and easy-to-use tool for every analyst, investigator, and leader. Some recent changes and improvements include: Customizable hover cards You can now customize the hover cards in Graph Explorer based on your specific use case. For instance, you can add pictures of your users’ listings if you monitor a marketplace, or see users' selfies if you find that more relevant to your investigations. (Or both, if you’d prefer.) The card can also include information you collect via Persona, such as when an account was created, the user’s name, selfie, and government ID images. And information you collect elsewhere and share with Persona. We support the following field types for custom fields: array, boolean, hash, image, number, and string. Once you set up your preferences, you can find the customized fields at the bottom of the account hover cards in Graph Explorer. Drag and drop Graph results into automated verification flows  Graph queries can be saved as templates and added as conditional steps in Workflows, Persona’s drag-and-drop user flow editor. You can also stage a partial rollout of your new flow into different active environments directly from the Workflow editor. For example, based on earlier investigations, you might create a template that determines whether an account is within three hops of at least 15 other accounts with the same device fingerprint, browser fingerprint, government ID number, or similar image. After adding the template to your Persona Workflow, you can use the real-time link analysis results to automatically approve, block, and tag accounts.“Another approach that I’ll take with some customers is what we call a reverse Graph query,” says Ashley. “It's not really a reverse query, but it's basically starting with a list of customer accounts with bad account statuses, like people with inappropriate behavior on the platform. We can run a Graph query and say that if anyone new tries to onboard with certain properties that are connected to these known bad accounts, then decline them.”Data exporting for internal analysis We can return the Graph query result data to you via API or webhooks for your internal monitoring or analysis. We usually recommend using a webhook, which allows you to receive automatic notifications based on specific events, such as when someone completes or fails a verification flow. 5. Get consistent fraud insights across your user life cycleGraph automatically syncs across and is integrated into other parts of Persona’s verified identity platform.The Workflows (and Flow Editor) integration is an important example. But you can also see Graph results in Cases, Persona’s case management and manual review hub. Additionally, you can collect data for Graph with Sentinel, a lightweight Software Development Kit (SDK) that allows you to continuously capture device, network, and behavioral signals from mobile and browser sessions. Sentinel can be helpful if you’re using a different system for verifications or you have an API-based flow with Persona. It also automatically connects to Graph and Workflows to give you consistent and consolidated insights across user life cycles. Use Sentinel and Graph together to set baselines before users go through a Persona flow and determine routing or step-up requirements for users based on these initial signals and connections. 6. Connect Graphs across business units and partners to detect broader fraud patternsIf you’re capable of sharing information, you can partner with Persona and others to act on insights from separate Graph instances. To start, you can opt to connect Graphs between your sub-organizations at Persona. This can help you stop policy abuse and fraud when bad actors target different parts of your business. You can also explore cross-environment Graph agreements with other organizations. Persona Connect, a shareable KYC solution, helps facilitate this securely, in accordance with the unique constraints of your business. You can build and manage your cross-environment Graph ecosystem directly from the Persona Dashboard without engineering resources or custom setups. Each organization establishes secure connections with specific partners, obtains explicit user consent, selects the data to share, and receives comprehensive audit logs.  See Graph in actionWe built Graph to help fraud fighters stay ahead of sophisticated attacks without adding engineering complexity. Whether you're dealing with promotion abuse, account sharing, deepfakes, identity mules, organized fraud rings, or other forms of scaling fraud, Graph gives you the visibility and speed you need to act quickly.Want to see how Graph can help your team catch more fraud? Contact us for a demo, or learn more about Graph.
   
      Guide
     How do top teams use link analysis? Find out in The fraud leader's guide to link analysis
   
   
      Download now
      
         
            
         
      
   
 
The information provided is not intended to constitute legal advice; all information
                provided is for general informational purposes only and may not constitute the most
                up-to-date information. Any links to other third-party websites are only for the
                convenience of the reader.
Louis DeNicolaLouis DeNicola is a content marketing manager at Persona who focuses on fraud and identity. You can often find him at the climbing gym, in the kitchen (cooking or snacking), or relaxing with his wife and cat in West Oakland.Table of contents1. Run complex queries 4x faster for real-time insights 2. Create custom nodes to catch fraud that’s unique to your business3. Detect sophisticated fraud with more signals and nodes4. Investigate faster and automate decisions with quality-of-life upgrades5. Get consistent fraud insights across your user life cycle6. Connect Graphs across business units and partners to detect broader fraud patternsSee Graph in actionContinue reading(()=>{var e=async t=>{await(await t())()};(self.Astro||(self.Astro={})).only=e;window.dispatchEvent(new Event("astro:only"));})();
