2026-03-11 | Introducing Candidate Verification by Persona

URL: https://withpersona.com/blog/introducing-candidate-verification-solution-by-persona

 blog AI-driven candidate fraud is reshaping hiring. Persona's candidate verification solution confirms who's really applying at every stage of your hiring cycle. Workforce security  Published March 11, 2026Last updated March 12, 2026Introducing Persona’s candidate verification solution: Stop AI-powered candidate fraud before it reaches your workforcePersona's candidate verification solution is designed for recruiting teams and built for security. Confirm your candidates are real, from application to onboarding and beyond. Jenna KimJoshua Rodriguez     4 min BlogIntroducing Persona’s candidate verification solution: Stop AI-powered candidate fraud before it reaches your workforceCopy link

Link copied!
 Hiring has never been easy. But in the last year, it’s taken on an entirely new level of complexity.Fake candidates have become one of the most urgent problems facing HR, talent, and InfoSec teams alike. Today’s recruiters are flooded with AI-generated resumes that are nearly impossible to distinguish from legitimate candidates. When fake candidates make it to interviews, the tactics escalate with deepfakes used to impersonate people and proxy stand-ins for technical assessments.Candidate fraud is a nightmare for everyone involved. Recruiters lose countless hours to double- and triple-checking applications, only to worry that a bad actor slipped through anyways. Legitimate candidates endure frustrating, drawn-out hiring processes. And for InfoSec teams, the stakes are even higher: a single bad hire can be a serious security vulnerability.That’s why we're introducing a new candidate verification solution, designed to help you confirm that the person applying, interviewing, and onboarding is real, present, and who they claim to be. By verifying identity earlier, you can reclaim time for the candidates who matter and stop security threats before day one. Unlike point solutions that verify identity once, Persona confirms identity across the entire employee life cycle: from application to offer, from day one and beyond. The identity confirmed during hiring carries forward into IT provisioning, credential issuance, and ongoing authentication — closing a critical gap between HR and IT that other solutions leave open.How candidate verification worksCandidate verification brings identity proofing right into your existing hiring workflows. We integrate directly with the ATS platforms you already use, including Greenhouse, Ashby, and Workday, so you won’t have to overhaul your hiring process.Our solution is fully customizable. You decide when and how verification happens based on your hiring needs, role requirements, and risk tolerance. For most companies, that means adding verification checks at three key moments:At application or screening: First, your candidate completes identity verification in moments using a government ID photo and selfie. This step establishes a verified identity record without adding friction for legitimate applicants.Before key interviews: For final rounds or technical interviews, reverify your candidate to confirm they’re the same person interviewing. The goal is to stop impersonation before you invest time or extend offers.At the offer stage: A final identity check ensures the person you hire is the same person you interviewed.For candidates, the experience is simple, mobile-friendly, and fast. They’re verified in seconds, while higher-risk sessions are flagged for additional review.
	With application volume on the rise and a lean talent team, we can't afford to spend time questioning whether a candidate is real or is who they say they are. Our time belongs in real conversations with hiring teams — and hiring real people.
	
		Natalie Disraeli
	  Head of Talent at Persona
	
A single platform for the candidate and employee life cyclePersona simplifies verification for both HR and InfoSec by providing one platform that works across the entire employee life cycle. Once verified during hiring, that same identity extends through onboarding, system provisioning, and account recovery. This approach is especially critical for organizations with remote teams, contractors, or distributed workforces, where traditional controls like badge access and in-person onboarding don't apply. Persona ensures you know who has access to your systems, regardless of where or when they were hired. With one platform for HR and InfoSec, you can:Protect pipeline quality and recruiting efficiencyWhen fake candidates infiltrate your funnel, they skew conversion rates and sourcing metrics, making it harder to see what's actually working. Worse, they waste countless recruiter hours evaluating candidates that turn out to be fake.By removing fake candidates from your pipeline, you can safeguard hiring accuracy and plan headcount with confidence. Meanwhile, your recruiters can focus on what they were hired to do: engage with qualified talent.Maintain a strong candidate experienceTop talent moves fast, and hiring teams are under pressure to keep up. But every additional step in the hiring process creates friction that risks losing qualified candidates to competitors. With our candidate verification solution, legitimate candidates complete verification in seconds. We embed verification directly into your existing candidate flow with simple, mobile-friendly experiences, so verification feels like a natural next step. Stop security threats before day oneFor security teams, the hiring process has become a critical vulnerability. Threat actors have learned they can bypass your organization’s security controls simply by getting hired. In fact, organized fraud rings and state-sponsored threat actors (including North Korean IT workers) now target hiring as a deliberate attack vector.Persona’s candidate verification solution creates a security checkpoint before employment. You confirm identity before provisioning access, not after. For security teams, this is the hiring control they've been asking for. Take the next step with PersonaOur candidate verification solution is a part of our broader workforce identity verification solution. Built for global hiring teams, it’s available in 40+ languages and works across 200+ countries and territories.Wondering how to protect your hiring process from AI-powered fraud and security threats? Join our upcoming webinar to see how candidate verification works, hear from HR leaders using it, and get your questions answered.You can also schedule a demo to see how candidate verification integrates with your ATS and fits your specific hiring workflow. 
The information provided is not intended to constitute legal advice; all information
                provided is for general informational purposes only and may not constitute the most
                up-to-date information. Any links to other third-party websites are only for the
                convenience of the reader.
Jenna KimJenna Kim is a product manager building Persona's third-party integrations marketplace. Outside of work, she can usually be found at the driving range, tennis courts, or park with a book in hand.Joshua RodriguezJoshua Rodriguez is a product marketing manager at Persona covering fraud and workforce identity. You'll find him around the Bay Area exploring parks and museums with his wife and two kids.Table of contentsHow candidate verification worksA single platform for the candidate and employee life cycleTake the next step with PersonaContinue reading(()=>{var e=async t=>{await(await t())()};(self.Astro||(self.Astro={})).only=e;window.dispatchEvent(new Event("astro:only"));})();
