============================================================
 Chapter 14 - Psychology
 (PDF pages 363-398)
============================================================

--- Page 363 ---

Chapter 14
Psychology
In previous chapters we developed ideas for algorithms based on computational con-
siderations alone. In this chapter we look at some of these algorithms from another
perspective: the perspective of psychology and its study of how animals learn. The goals
of this chapter are, ﬁrst, to discuss ways that reinforcement learning ideas and algorithms
correspond to what psychologists have discovered about animal learning, and second, to
explain the inﬂuence reinforcement learning is having on the study of animal learning.
The clear formalism provided by reinforcement learning that systemizes tasks, returns,
and algorithms is proving to be enormously useful in making sense of experimental data,
in suggesting new kinds of experiments, and in pointing to factors that may be critical to
manipulate and to measure. The idea of optimizing return over the long term that is
at the core of reinforcement learning is contributing to our understanding of otherwise
puzzling features of animal learning and behavior.
Some of the correspondences between reinforcement learning and psychological theories
are not surprising because the development of reinforcement learning drew inspiration
from psychological learning theories. However, as developed in this book, reinforcement
learning explores idealized situations from the perspective of an artiﬁcial intelligence
researcher or engineer, with the goal of solving computational problems with eﬃcient
algorithms, rather than to replicate or explain in detail how animals learn. As a result,
some of the correspondences we describe connect ideas that arose independently in their
respective ﬁelds. We believe these points of contact are specially meaningful because they
expose computational principles important to learning, whether it is learning by artiﬁcial
or by natural systems.
For the most part, we describe correspondences between reinforcement learning and
learning theories developed to explain how animals like rats, pigeons, and rabbits learn
in controlled laboratory experiments. Thousands of these experiments were conducted
throughout the 20th century, and many are still being conducted today.
Although
sometimes dismissed as irrelevant to wider issues in psychology, these experiments probe
subtle properties of animal learning, often motivated by precise theoretical questions.
As psychology shifted its focus to more cognitive aspects of behavior, that is, to mental


--- Page 364 ---

342
Chapter 14: Psychology
processes such as thought and reasoning, animal learning experiments came to play
less of a role in psychology than they once did. But this experimentation led to the
discovery of learning principles that are elemental and widespread throughout the animal
kingdom, principles that should not be neglected in designing artiﬁcial learning systems.
In addition, as we shall see, some aspects of cognitive processing connect naturally to the
computational perspective provided by reinforcement learning.
This chapter’s ﬁnal section includes references relevant to the connections we discuss as
well as to connections we neglect. We hope this chapter encourages readers to probe all
of these connections more deeply. Also included in this ﬁnal section is a discussion of how
the terminology used in reinforcement learning relates to that of psychology. Many of
the terms and phrases used in reinforcement learning are borrowed from animal learning
theories, but the computational/engineering meanings of these terms and phrases do not
always coincide with their meanings in psychology.
14.1
Prediction and Control
The algorithms we describe in this book fall into two broad categories: algorithms
for prediction and algorithms for control.1 These categories arise naturally in solution
methods for the reinforcement learning problem presented in Chapter 3. In many ways
these categories respectively correspond to categories of learning extensively studied
by psychologists: classical, or Pavlovian, conditioning and instrumental, or operant,
conditioning. These correspondences are not completely accidental because of psychology’s
inﬂuence on reinforcement learning, but they are nevertheless striking because they connect
ideas arising from di↵erent objectives.
The prediction algorithms presented in this book estimate quantities that depend
on how features of an agent’s environment are expected to unfold over the future. We
speciﬁcally focus on estimating the amount of reward an agent can expect to receive over
the future while it interacts with its environment. In this role, prediction algorithms are
policy evaluation algorithms, which are integral components of algorithms for improving
policies. But prediction algorithms are not limited to predicting future reward; they can
predict any feature of the environment (see, for example, Modayil, White, and Sutton,
2014). The correspondence between prediction algorithms and classical conditioning rests
on their common property of predicting upcoming stimuli, whether or not those stimuli
are rewarding (or punishing).
The situation in an instrumental, or operant, conditioning experiment is di↵erent.
Here, the experimental apparatus is set up so that an animal is given something it likes
(a reward) or something it dislikes (a penalty) depending on what the animal did. The
animal learns to increase its tendency to produce rewarded behavior and to decrease its
tendency to produce penalized behavior. The reinforcing stimulus is said to be contingent
on the animal’s behavior, whereas in classical conditioning it is not (although it is diﬃcult
to remove all behavior contingencies in a classical conditioning experiment). Instrumental
1What control means for us is di↵erent from what it typically means in animal learning theories; there
the environment controls the agent instead of the other way around. See our comments on terminology
at the end of this chapter.


--- Page 365 ---

14.2. Classical Conditioning
343
conditioning experiments are like those that inspired Thorndike’s Law of E↵ect that
we brieﬂy discuss in Chapter 1. Control is at the core of this form of learning, which
corresponds to the operation of reinforcement learning’s policy-improvement algorithms.
Thinking of classical conditioning in terms of prediction, and instrumental conditioning
in terms of control, is a starting point for connecting our computational view of rein-
forcement learning to animal learning, but in reality, the situation is more complicated
than this. There is more to classical conditioning than prediction; it also involves action,
and so is a mode of control, sometimes called Pavlovian control. Further, classical and
instrumental conditioning interact in interesting ways, with both sorts of learning likely
being engaged in most experimental situations. Despite these complications, aligning the
classical/instrumental distinction with the prediction/control distinction is a convenient
ﬁrst approximation in connecting reinforcement learning to animal learning.
In psychology, the term reinforcement is used to describe learning in both classical and
instrumental conditioning. Originally referring only to the strengthening of a pattern of
behavior, it is frequently also used for the weakening of a pattern of behavior. A stimulus
considered to be the cause of the change in behavior is called a reinforcer, whether or
not it is contingent on the animal’s previous behavior. At the end of this chapter we
discuss this terminology in more detail and how it relates to terminology used in machine
learning.
14.2
Classical Conditioning
While studying the activity of the digestive system, the celebrated Russian physiologist
Ivan Pavlov found that an animal’s innate responses to certain triggering stimuli can
come to be triggered by other stimuli that are quite unrelated to the inborn triggers. His
experimental subjects were dogs that had undergone minor surgery to allow the intensity
of their salivary reﬂex to be accurately measured. In one case he describes, the dog did
not salivate under most circumstances, but about 5 seconds after being presented with
food it produced about six drops of saliva over the next several seconds. After several
repetitions of presenting another stimulus, one not related to food, in this case the sound
of a metronome, shortly before the introduction of food, the dog salivated in response to
the sound of the metronome in the same way it did to the food. “The activity of the
salivary gland has thus been called into play by impulses of sound—a stimulus quite
alien to food” (Pavlov, 1927, p. 22). Summarizing the signiﬁcance of this ﬁnding, Pavlov
wrote:
It is pretty evident that under natural conditions the normal animal must
respond not only to stimuli which themselves bring immediate beneﬁt or
harm, but also to other physical or chemical agencies—waves of sound, light,
and the like—which in themselves only signal the approach of these stimuli;
though it is not the sight and sound of the beast of prey which is in itself
harmful to the smaller animal, but its teeth and claws. (Pavlov, 1927, p. 14)
Connecting new stimuli to innate reﬂexes in this way is now called classical, or Pavlovian,
conditioning. Pavlov (or more exactly, his translators) called inborn responses (e.g.,


--- Page 366 ---

344
Chapter 14: Psychology
salivation in his demonstration described above) “unconditioned responses” (URs), their
natural triggering stimuli (e.g., food) “unconditioned stimuli” (USs), and new responses
triggered by predictive stimuli (e.g., here also salivation) “conditioned responses” (CRs).
A stimulus that is initially neutral, meaning that it does not normally elicit strong
responses (e.g., the metronome sound), becomes a “conditioned stimulus” (CS) as the
animal learns that it predicts the US and so comes to produce a CR in response to the CS.
These terms are still used in describing classical conditioning experiments (though better
translations would have been “conditional” and “unconditional” instead of conditioned
and unconditioned). The US is called a reinforcer because it reinforces producing a CR
in response to the CS.
t
Trace Conditioning
Delay Conditioning
CS
US
CS
US
ISI
The arrangement of stimuli in two
common types of classical condition-
ing experiments is shown to the right.
In delay conditioning, the CS extends
throughout the interstimulus interval, or
ISI, which is the time interval between
the CS onset and the US onset (with
the CS ending when the US ends in a
common version shown here). In trace
conditioning, the US begins after the CS
ends, and the time interval between CS
o↵set and US onset is called the trace
interval.
The salivation of Pavlov’s dogs to the
sound of a metronome is just one exam-
ple of classical conditioning, which has
been intensively studied across many response systems of many species of animals. URs
are often preparatory in some way, like the salivation of Pavlov’s dog, or protective in
some way, like an eye blink in response to something irritating to the eye, or freezing
in response to seeing a predator. Experiencing the CS-US predictive relationship over
a series of trials causes the animal to learn that the CS predicts the US so that the
animal can respond to the CS with a CR that prepares the animal for, or protects it
from, the predicted US. Some CRs are similar to the UR but begin earlier and di↵er in
ways that increase their e↵ectiveness. In one intensively studied type of experiment, for
example, a tone CS reliably predicts a pu↵of air (the US) to a rabbit’s eye, triggering a
UR consisting of the closure of a protective inner eyelid called the nictitating membrane.
After one or more trials, the tone comes to trigger a CR consisting of membrane closure
that begins before the air pu↵and eventually becomes timed so that peak closure occurs
just when the air pu↵is likely to occur. This CR, being initiated in anticipation of the
air pu↵and appropriately timed, o↵ers better protection than simply initiating closure
as a reaction to the irritating US. The ability to act in anticipation of important events
by learning about predictive relationships among stimuli is so beneﬁcial that it is widely
present across the animal kingdom.


--- Page 367 ---

14.2. Classical Conditioning
345
14.2.1
Blocking and Higher-order Conditioning
Many interesting properties of classical conditioning have been observed in experiments.
Beyond the anticipatory nature of CRs, two widely observed properties ﬁgured prominently
in the development of classical conditioning models: blocking and higher-order conditioning.
Blocking occurs when an animal fails to learn a CR when a potential CS is presented along
with another CS that had been used previously to condition the animal to produce that
CR. For example, in the ﬁrst stage of a blocking experiment involving rabbit nictitating
membrane conditioning, a rabbit is ﬁrst conditioned with a tone CS and an air pu↵US
to produce the CR of closing its nictitating membrane in anticipation of the air pu↵. The
experiment’s second stage consists of additional trials in which a second stimulus, say
a light, is added to the tone to form a compound tone/light CS followed by the same
air pu↵US. In the experiment’s third phase, the second stimulus alone—the light—is
presented to the rabbit to see if the rabbit has learned to respond to it with a CR. It
turns out that the rabbit produces very few, or no, CRs in response to the light: learning
to the light had been blocked by the previous learning to the tone.2 Blocking results like
this challenged the idea that conditioning depends only on simple temporal contiguity,
that is, that a necessary and suﬃcient condition for conditioning is that a US frequently
follows a CS closely in time. In the next section we describe the Rescorla–Wagner model
(Rescorla and Wagner, 1972) that o↵ered an inﬂuential explanation for blocking.
Higher-order conditioning occurs when a previously-conditioned CS acts as a US
in conditioning another initially neutral stimulus. Pavlov described an experiment in
which his assistant ﬁrst conditioned a dog to salivate to the sound of a metronome that
predicted a food US, as described above. After this stage of conditioning, a number of
trials were conducted in which a black square, to which the dog was initially indi↵erent,
was placed in the dog’s line of vision followed by the sound of the metronome—and
this was not followed by food. In just ten trials, the dog began to salivate merely upon
seeing the black square, despite the fact that the sight of it had never been followed by
food. The sound of the metronome itself acted as a US in conditioning a salivation CR
to the black square CS. This was second-order conditioning. If the black square had
been used as a US to establish salivation CRs to another otherwise neutral CS, it would
have been third-order conditioning, and so on. Higher-order conditioning is diﬃcult to
demonstrate, especially above the second order, in part because a higher-order reinforcer
loses its reinforcing value due to not being repeatedly followed by the original US during
higher-order conditioning trials. But under the right conditions, such as intermixing
ﬁrst-order trials with higher-order trials or by providing a general energizing stimulus,
higher-order conditioning beyond the second order can be demonstrated. As we describe
below, the TD model of classical conditioning uses the bootstrapping idea that is central
to our approach to extend the Rescorla–Wagner model’s account of blocking to include
both the anticipatory nature of CRs and higher-order conditioning.
2Comparison with a control group is necessary to show that the previous conditioning to the tone is
responsible for blocking learning to the light. This is done by trials with the tone/light CS but with no
prior conditioning to the tone. Learning to the light in this case is unimpaired. Moore and Schmajuk
(2008) give a full account of this procedure.


--- Page 368 ---

346
Chapter 14: Psychology
Higher-order instrumental conditioning occurs as well. In this case, a stimulus that
consistently predicts primary reinforcement becomes a reinforcer itself, where reinforce-
ment is primary if its rewarding or penalizing quality has been built into the animal by
evolution. The predicting stimulus becomes a secondary reinforcer, or more generally, a
higher-order or conditioned reinforcer—the latter being a better term when the predicted
reinforcing stimulus is itself a secondary, or an even higher-order, reinforcer. A condi-
tioned reinforcer delivers conditioned reinforcement: conditioned reward or conditioned
penalty. Conditioned reinforcement acts like primary reinforcement in increasing an
animal’s tendency to produce behavior that leads to conditioned reward, and to decrease
an animal’s tendency to produce behavior that leads to conditioned penalty. (See our
comments at the end of this chapter that explain how our terminology sometimes di↵ers,
as it does here, from terminology used in psychology.)
Conditioned reinforcement is a key phenomenon that explains, for instance, why we
work for the conditioned reinforcer money, whose worth derives solely from what is
predicted by having it. In actor–critic methods described in Section 13.5 (and discussed
in the context of neuroscience in Sections 15.7 and 15.8), the critic uses a TD method
to evaluate the actor’s policy, and its value estimates provide conditioned reinforcement
to the actor, allowing the actor to improve its policy.
This analog of higher-order
instrumental conditioning helps address the credit-assignment problem mentioned in
Section 1.7 because the critic gives moment-by-moment reinforcement to the actor when
the primary reward signal is delayed. We discuss this more below in Section 14.4.
14.2.2
The Rescorla–Wagner Model
Rescorla and Wagner created their model mainly to account for blocking. The core
idea of the Rescorla–Wagner model is that an animal only learns when events violate
its expectations, in other words, only when the animal is surprised (although without
necessarily implying any conscious expectation or emotion). We ﬁrst present Rescorla and
Wagner’s model using their terminology and notation before shifting to the terminology
and notation we use to describe the TD model.
Here is how Rescorla and Wagner described their model. The model adjusts the
“associative strength” of each component stimulus of a compound CS, which is a number
representing how strongly or reliably that component is predictive of a US. When
a compound CS consisting of several component stimuli is presented in a classical
conditioning trial, the associative strength of each component stimulus changes in a way
that depends on an associative strength associated with the entire stimulus compound,
called the “aggregate associative strength,” and not just on the associative strength of
each component itself.
Rescorla and Wagner considered a compound CS AX, consisting of component stimuli
A and X, where the animal may have already experienced stimulus A, and stimulus X
might be new to the animal. Let VA, VX, and VAX respectively denote the associative
strengths of stimuli A, X, and the compound AX. Suppose that on a trial the compound
CS AX is followed by a US, which we label stimulus Y. Then the associative strengths of


--- Page 369 ---

14.2. Classical Conditioning
347
the stimulus components change according to these expressions:
∆VA = ↵AβY(RY −VAX)
∆VX = ↵XβY(RY −VAX),
where ↵AβY and ↵XβY are the step-size parameters, which depend on the identities of
the CS components and the US, and RY is the asymptotic level of associative strength
that the US Y can support. (Rescorla and Wagner used λ here instead of R, but we
use R to avoid confusion with our use of λ and because we usually think of this as the
magnitude of a reward signal, with the caveat that the US in classical conditioning is not
necessarily rewarding or penalizing.) A key assumption of the model is that the aggregate
associative strength VAX is equal to VA + VX. The associative strengths as changed by
these ∆s become the associative strengths at the beginning of the next trial.
To be complete, the model needs a response-generation mechanism, which is a way
of mapping values of V s to CRs. Because this mapping would depend on details of
the experimental situation, Rescorla and Wagner did not specify a mapping but simply
assumed that larger V s would produce stronger or more likely CRs, and that negative
V s would mean that there would be no CRs.
The Rescorla–Wagner model accounts for the acquisition of CRs in a way that explains
blocking. As long as the aggregate associative strength, VAX, of the stimulus compound
is below the asymptotic level of associative strength, RY, that the US Y can support, the
prediction error RY−VAX is positive. This means that over successive trials the associative
strengths VA and VX of the component stimuli increase until the aggregate associative
strength VAX equals RY, at which point the associative strengths stop changing (unless the
US changes). When a new component is added to a compound CS to which the animal has
already been conditioned, further conditioning with the augmented compound produces
little or no increase in the associative strength of the added CS component because the
error has already been reduced to zero, or to a low value. The occurrence of the US is
already predicted nearly perfectly, so little or no error—or surprise—is introduced by the
new CS component. Prior learning blocks learning to the new component.
To transition from Rescorla and Wagner’s model to the TD model of classical condi-
tioning (which we just call the TD model), we ﬁrst recast their model in terms of the
concepts that we are using throughout this book. Speciﬁcally, we match the notation
we use for learning with linear function approximation (Section 9.4), and we think of
the conditioning process as one of learning to predict the “magnitude of the US” on a
trial on the basis of the compound CS presented on that trial, where the magnitude of
a US Y is the RY of the Rescorla–Wagner model as given above. We also introduce
states. Because the Rescorla–Wagner model is a trial-level model, meaning that it deals
with how associative strengths change from trial to trial without considering any details
about what happens within and between trials, we do not have to consider how states
change during a trial until we present the full TD model in the following section. Instead,
here we simply think of a state as a way of labeling a trial in terms of the collection of
component CSs that are present on the trial.
Therefore, assume that trial-type, or state, s is described by a real-valued vector of
features x(s) = (x1(s), x2(s), . . . , xd(s))> where xi(s) = 1 if CSi, the ith component of a


--- Page 370 ---

348
Chapter 14: Psychology
compound CS, is present on the trial and 0 otherwise. Then if the d-dimensional vector
of associative strengths is w, the aggregate associative strength for trial-type s is
ˆv(s,w) = w>x(s).
(14.1)
This corresponds to a value estimate in reinforcement learning, and we think of it as the
US prediction.
Now temporally let t denote the number of a complete trial and not its usual meaning
as a time step (we revert to t’s usual meaning when we extend this to the TD model
below), and assume that St is the state corresponding to trial t. Conditioning trial t
updates the associative strength vector wt to wt+1 as follows:
wt+1 = wt + ↵δtx(St),
(14.2)
where ↵is the step-size parameter, and—because here we are describing the Rescorla–
Wagner model—δt is the prediction error
δt = Rt −ˆv(St,wt).
(14.3)
Rt is the target of the prediction on trial t, that is, the magnitude of the US, or in Rescorla
and Wagner’s terms, the associative strength that the US on the trial can support. Note
that because of the factor x(St) in (14.2), only the associative strengths of CS components
present on a trial are adjusted as a result of that trial. You can think of the prediction
error as a measure of surprise, and the aggregate associative strength as the animal’s
expectation that is violated when it does not match the target US magnitude.
From the perspective of machine learning, the Rescorla–Wagner model is an error-
correction supervised learning rule. It is essentially the same as the Least Mean Square
(LMS), or Widrow-Ho↵, learning rule (Widrow and Ho↵, 1960) that ﬁnds the weights—
here the associative strengths—that make the average of the squares of all the errors as
close to zero as possible. It is a “curve-ﬁtting,” or regression, algorithm that is widely
used in engineering and scientiﬁc applications (see Section 9.4).3
The Rescorla–Wagner model was very inﬂuential in the history of animal learning
theory because it showed that a “mechanistic” theory could account for the main facts
about blocking without resorting to more complex cognitive theories involving, for
example, an animal’s explicit recognition that another stimulus component had been
added and then scanning its short-term memory backward to reassess the predictive
relationships involving the US. The Rescorla–Wagner model showed how traditional
contiguity theories of conditioning—that temporal contiguity of stimuli was a necessary
and suﬃcient condition for learning—could be adjusted in a simple way to account for
blocking (Moore and Schmajuk, 2008).
The Rescorla–Wagner model provides a simple account of blocking and some other
features of classical conditioning, but it is not a complete or perfect model of classical
3The only di↵erences between the LMS rule and the Rescorla–Wagner model are that for LMS the
input vectors xt can have any real numbers as components, and—at least in the simplest version of the
LMS rule—the step-size parameter ↵does not depend on the input vector or the identity of the stimulus
setting the prediction target.


--- Page 371 ---

14.2. Classical Conditioning
349
conditioning. Di↵erent ideas account for a variety of other observed e↵ects, and progress
is still being made toward understanding the many subtleties of classical conditioning.
The TD model, which we describe next, though also not a complete or perfect model
model of classical conditioning, extends the Rescorla–Wagner model to address how
within-trial and between-trial timing relationships among stimuli can inﬂuence learning
and how higher-order conditioning might arise.
14.2.3
The TD Model
The TD model is a real-time model, as opposed to a trial-level model like the Rescorla–
Wagner model.
A single step t in the Rescorla–Wagner model represents an entire
conditioning trial. The model does not apply to details about what happens during the
time a trial is taking place, or what might happen between trials. Within each trial an
animal might experience various stimuli whose onsets occur at particular times and that
have particular durations. These timing relationships strongly inﬂuence learning. The
Rescorla–Wagner model also does not include a mechanism for higher-order conditioning,
whereas for the TD model, higher-order conditioning is a natural consequence of the
bootstrapping idea that is at the base of TD algorithms.
To describe the TD model we begin with the formulation of the Rescorla–Wagner
model above, but t now labels time steps within or between trials instead of complete
trials. Think of the time between t and t + 1 as a small time interval, say .01 second, and
think of a trial as a sequences of states, one associated with each time step, where the
state at step t now represents details of how stimuli are represented at t instead of just
a label for the CS components present on a trial. In fact, we can completely abandon
the idea of trials. From the point of view of the animal, a trial is just a fragment of its
continuing experience interacting with its world. Following our usual view of an agent
interacting with its environment, imagine that the animal is experiencing an endless
sequence of states s, each represented by a feature vector x(s). That said, it is still often
convenient to refer to trials as fragments of time during which patterns of stimuli repeat
in an experiment.
State features are not restricted to describing the external stimuli that an animal
experiences; they can describe neural activity patterns that external stimuli produce in
an animal’s brain, and these patterns can be history-dependent, meaning that they can
be persistent patterns produced by sequences of external stimuli. Of course, we do not
know exactly what these neural activity patterns are, but a real-time model like the TD
model allows one to explore the consequences on learning of di↵erent hypotheses about
the internal representations of external stimuli. For these reasons, the TD model does
not commit to any particular state representation. In addition, because the TD model
includes discounting and eligibility traces that span time intervals between stimuli, the
model also makes it possible to explore how discounting and eligibility traces interact with
stimulus representations in making predictions about the results of classical conditioning
experiments.
Below we describe some of the state representations that have been used with the
TD model and some of their implications, but for the moment we stay agnostic about


--- Page 372 ---

350
Chapter 14: Psychology
the representation and just assume that each state s is represented by a feature vector
x(s) = (x1(s), x2(s), . . . , xn(s))>. Then the aggregate associative strength corresponding
to a state s is given by (14.1), the same as for the Rescorla-Wagner model, but the TD
model updates the associative strength vector, w, di↵erently. With t now labeling a time
step instead of a complete trial, the TD model governs learning according to this update:
wt+1 = wt + ↵δtzt,
(14.4)
which replaces xt(St) in the Rescorla–Wagner update (14.2) with zt, a vector of eligibility
traces, and instead of the δt of (14.3), here δt is a TD error:
δt = Rt+1 + γˆv(St+1,wt) −ˆv(St,wt),
(14.5)
where γ is a discount factor (between 0 and 1), Rt is the prediction target at time t, and
ˆv(St+1,wt) and ˆv(St,wt) are aggregate associative strengths at t + 1 and t as deﬁned by
(14.1).
Each component i of the eligibility-trace vector zt increments or decrements according
to the component xi(St) of the feature vector x(St), and otherwise decays with a rate
determined by γλ:
zt = γλzt−1 + x(St).
(14.6)
Here λ is the usual eligibility trace decay parameter.
Note that if γ = 0, the TD model reduces to the Rescorla–Wagner model with the
exceptions that: the meaning of t is di↵erent in each case (a trial number for the
Rescorla–Wagner model and a time step for the TD model), and in the TD model there
is a one-time-step lead in the prediction target R. The TD model is equivalent to the
backward view of the semi-gradient TD(λ) algorithm with linear function approximation
(Chapter 12), except that Rt in the model does not have to be a reward signal as it does
when the TD algorithm is used to learn a value function for policy-improvement.
14.2.4
TD Model Simulations
Real-time conditioning models like the TD model are interesting primarily because they
make predictions for a wide range of situations that cannot be represented by trial-level
models. These situations involve the timing and durations of conditionable stimuli, the
timing of these stimuli in relation to the timing of the US, and the timing and shapes
of CRs. For example, the US generally must begin after the onset of a neutral stimulus
for conditioning to occur, with the rate and e↵ectiveness of learning depending on the
inter-stimulus interval, or ISI, the interval between the onsets of the CS and the US. When
CRs appear, they generally begin before the appearance of the US and their temporal
proﬁles change during learning. In conditioning with compound CSs, the component
stimuli of the compound CSs may not all begin and end at the same time, sometimes
forming what is called a serial compound in which the component stimuli occur in a
sequence over time. Timing considerations like these make it important to consider how


--- Page 373 ---

14.2. Classical Conditioning
351
Presence
Complete Serial 
Compound
Stimulus 
Representation
Microstimuli
CS
US
Figure 14.1: Three stimulus representations (in columns) sometimes used with the TD model.
Each row represents one element of the stimulus representation. The three representations vary
along a temporal generalization gradient, with no generalization between nearby time points in
the complete serial compound (left column) and complete generalization between nearby time
points in the presence representation (right column). The microstimulus representation occupies
a middle ground. The degree of temporal generalization determines the temporal granularity
with which US predictions are learned. Adapted with minor changes from Learning & Behavior,
Evaluating the TD Model of Classical Conditioning, volume 40, 2012, p. 311, E. A. Ludvig, R. S.
Sutton, E. J. Kehoe. With permission of Springer.
stimuli are represented, how these representations unfold over time during and between
trials, and how they interact with discounting and eligibility traces.
Figure 14.1 shows three of the stimulus representations that have been used in exploring
the behavior of the TD model: the complete serial compound (CSC), the microstimulus
(MS), and the presence representations (Ludvig, Sutton, and Kehoe, 2012).
These
representations di↵er in the degree to which they force generalization among nearby time
points during which a stimulus is present.
The simplest of the representations shown in Figure 14.1 is the presence representation
in the ﬁgure’s right column. This representation has a single feature for each component
CS present on a trial, where the feature has value 1 whenever that component is present,
and 0 otherwise.4 The presence representation is not a realistic hypothesis about how
stimuli are represented in an animal’s brain, but as we describe below, the TD model
with this representation can produce many of the timing phenomena seen in classical
conditioning.
4In our formalism, there is a di↵erent state, St, for each time step t during a trial, and for a trial
in which a compound CS consists of n component CSs of various durations occurring at various times
throughout the trial, there is a feature, xi, for each component CSi, i = 1, . . . , n, where xi(St) = 1 for
all times t when the CSi is present, and equals zero otherwise.


--- Page 374 ---

352
Chapter 14: Psychology
For the CSC representation (left column of Figure 14.1), the onset of each external
stimulus initiates a sequence of precisely-timed short-duration internal signals that
continues until the external stimulus ends.5 This is like assuming the animal’s nervous
system has a clock that keeps precise track of time during stimulus presentations; it is
what engineers call a “tapped delay line.” Like the presence representation, the CSC
representation is unrealistic as a hypothesis about how the brain internally represents
stimuli, but Ludvig et al. (2012) call it a “useful ﬁction” because it can reveal details of
how the TD model works when relatively unconstrained by the stimulus representation.
The CSC representation is also used in most TD models of dopamine-producing neurons
in the brain, a topic we take up in Chapter 15. The CSC representation is often viewed
as an essential part of the TD model, although this view is mistaken.
The MS representation (center column of Figure 14.1) is like the CSC representation
in that each external stimulus initiates a cascade of internal stimuli, but in this case the
internal stimuli—the microstimuli—are not of such limited and non-overlapping form;
they are extended over time and overlap. As time elapses from stimulus onset, di↵erent
sets of microstimuli become more or less active, and each subsequent microstimulus
becomes progressively wider in time and reaches a lower maximal level. Of course, there
are many MS representations depending on the nature of the microstimuli, and a number
of examples of MS representations have been studied in the literature, in some cases along
with proposals for how an animal’s brain might generate them (see the Bibliographic and
Historical Comments at the end of this chapter). MS representations are more realistic
than the presence or CSC representations as hypotheses about neural representations of
stimuli, and they allow the behavior of the TD model to be related to a broader collection
of phenomena observed in animal experiments. In particular, by assuming that cascades
of microstimuli are initiated by USs as well as by CSs, and by studying the signiﬁcant
e↵ects on learning of interactions between microstimuli, eligibility traces, and discounting,
the TD model is helping to frame hypotheses to account for many of the subtle phenomena
of classical conditioning and how an animal’s brain might produce them. We say more
about this below, particularly in Chapter 15 where we discuss reinforcement learning and
neuroscience.
Even with the simple presence representation, however, the TD model produces all the
basic properties of classical conditioning that are accounted for by the Rescorla–Wagner
model, plus features of conditioning that are beyond the scope of trial-level models. For
example, as we have already mentioned, a conspicuous feature of classical conditioning is
that the US generally must begin after the onset of a neutral stimulus for conditioning
to occur, and that after conditioning, the CR begins before the appearance of the US.
In other words, conditioning generally requires a positive ISI, and the CR generally
anticipates the US. How the strength of conditioning (e.g., the percentage of CRs elicited
by a CS) depends on the ISI varies substantially across species and response systems, but
it typically has the following properties: it is negligible for a zero or negative ISI, i.e., when
5In our formalism, for each CS component CSi present on a trial, and for each time step t during a
trial, there is a separate feature xt
i, where xt
i(St0) = 1 if t = t0 for any t0 at which CSi is present, and
equals 0 otherwise. This is di↵erent from the CSC representation in Sutton and Barto (1990) in which
there are the same distinct features for each time step but no reference to external stimuli; hence the
name complete serial compound.


--- Page 375 ---

14.2. Classical Conditioning
353
the US onset occurs simultaneously with, or earlier than, the CS onset (although research
has found that associative strengths sometimes increase slightly or become negative with
negative ISIs); it increases to a maximum at a positive ISI where conditioning is most
e↵ective; and it then decreases to zero after an interval that varies widely with response
systems. The precise shape of this dependency for the TD model depends on the values
of its parameters and details of the stimulus representation, but these basic features of
ISI-dependency are core properties of the TD model.
Facilitation of remote associations in the TD model
One of the theoretical issues arising
with serial-compound conditioning, that
is, conditioning with a compound CS
whose components occur in a sequence,
concerns the facilitation of remote asso-
ciations. It has been found that if the
empty trace interval between a ﬁrst CS
(CSA) and the US is ﬁlled with a second
CS (CSB) to form a serial-compound
stimulus, then conditioning to CSA is
facilitated.
Shown to the right is the
behavior of the TD model with the pres-
ence representation in a simulation of
such an experiment whose timing details
are shown above. Consistent with the
experimental results (Kehoe, 1982), the
model shows facilitation of both the rate
of conditioning and the asymptotic level
of conditioning of the ﬁrst CS due to the
presence of the second CS.
wCSB
The Egger-Miller e↵ect in the TD model
A well-known demonstration of the
e↵ects on conditioning of temporal re-
lationships among stimuli within a trial
is an experiment by Egger and Miller
(1962) that involved two overlapping
CSs in a delay conﬁguration as shown
to the right (top). Although CSB was
in a better temporal relationship with
the US, the presence of CSA substan-
tially reduced conditioning to CSB as
compared to controls in which CSA was
absent. Directly to the right is shown
the same result being generated by the
TD model in a simulation of this exper-
iment with the presence representation.
The TD model accounts for blocking
because it is an error-correcting learning


--- Page 376 ---

354
Chapter 14: Psychology
rule like the Rescorla–Wagner model. Beyond accounting for basic blocking results,
however, the TD model predicts (with the presence representation and more complex
representations as well) that blocking is reversed if the blocked stimulus is moved earlier
wCSB
Figure 14.2:
Temporal primacy overriding
blocking in the TD model.
in time (like CSA in the diagram to the
right) so that its onset occurs before the
onset of the blocking stimulus. This feature
of the TD model’s behavior deserves atten-
tion because it had not been observed at
the time of the model’s introduction. Recall
that in blocking, if an animal has already
learned that one CS predicts a US, then
learning that a newly-added second CS also
predicts the US is much reduced, i.e., is
blocked. But if the newly-added second CS
begins earlier than the pretrained CS, then—
according to the TD model—learning to the
newly-added CS is not blocked. In fact, as
training continues and the newly-added CS
gains associative strength, the pretrained
CS loses associative strength. The behavior
of the TD model under these conditions
is shown in the lower part of Figure 14.2.
This simulation experiment di↵ered from the Egger-Miller experiment (bottom of the
preceding page) in that the shorter CS with the later onset was given prior training
until it was fully associated with the US. This surprising prediction led Kehoe, Schreurs,
and Graham (1987) to conduct the experiment using the well-studied rabbit nictitating
membrane preparation. Their results conﬁrmed the model’s prediction, and they noted
that non-TD models have considerable diﬃculty explaining their data.
With the TD model, an earlier predictive stimulus takes precedence over a later
predictive stimulus because, like all the prediction methods described in this book, the
TD model is based on the backing-up or bootstrapping idea: updates to associative
strengths shift the strengths at a particular state toward the strength at later states.
Another consequence of bootstrapping is that the TD model provides an account of higher-
order conditioning, a feature of classical conditioning that is beyond the scope of the
Rescorla-Wagner and similar models. As we described above, higher-order conditioning
is the phenomenon in which a previously-conditioned CS can act as a US in conditioning
another initially neutral stimulus. Figure 14.3 shows the behavior of the TD model (again
with the presence representation) in a higher-order conditioning experiment—in this case
it is second-order conditioning. In the ﬁrst phase (not shown in the ﬁgure), CSB is trained
to predict a US so that its associative strength increases, here to 1.65. In the second
phase, CSA is paired with CSB in the absence of the US, in the sequential arrangement
shown at the top of the ﬁgure. CSA acquires associative strength even though it is never
paired with the US. With continued training, CSA’s associative strength reaches a peak
and then decreases because the associative strength of CSB, the secondary reinforcer,
decreases so that it loses its ability to provide secondary reinforcement. CSB’s associative


--- Page 377 ---

14.2. Classical Conditioning
355
w
Figure 14.3: Second-order conditioning with
the TD model.
strength decreases because the US does not
occur in these higher-order conditioning tri-
als. These are extinction trials for CSB
because its predictive relationship to the
US is disrupted so that its ability to act as
a reinforcer decreases. This same pattern
is seen in animal experiments. This extinc-
tion of conditioned reinforcement in higher-
order conditioning trials makes it diﬃcult
to demonstrate higher-order conditioning
unless the original predictive relationships
are periodically refreshed by occasionally
inserting ﬁrst-order trials.
The TD model produces an analog of
second- and higher-order conditioning be-
cause γˆv(St+1,wt) −ˆv(St,wt) appears in
the TD error δt (14.5). Due to the ﬁrst
phase of learning, γˆv(St+1,wt) may di↵er
from ˆv(St,wt), making δt non-zero (a temporal di↵erence). This di↵erence has the same
status as Rt+1 in (14.5), implying that as far as learning is concerned there is no di↵erence
between a temporal di↵erence and the occurrence of a US. In fact, this feature of the
TD algorithm is one of the major reasons for its development, which we now understand
through its connection to dynamic programming as described in Chapter 6. Bootstrapping
values is intimately related to second-order, and higher-order, conditioning.
In the examples of the TD model’s behavior described above, we examined only the
changes in the associative strengths of the CS components; we did not look at what
the model predicts about properties of an animal’s conditioned responses (CRs): their
timing, shape, and how they develop over conditioning trials. These properties depend
on the species, the response system being observed, and parameters of the conditioning
trials, but in many experiments with di↵erent animals and di↵erent response systems, the
magnitude of the CR, or the probability of a CR, increases as the expected time of the
US approaches. For example, in classical conditioning of a rabbit’s nictitating membrane
response that we mentioned above, over conditioning trials the delay from CS onset to
when the nictitating membrane begins to move across the eye decreases over trials, and
the amplitude of this anticipatory closure gradually increases over the interval between
the CS and the US until the membrane reaches maximal closure at the expected time of
the US. The timing and shape of this CR is critical to its adaptive signiﬁcance—covering
the eye too early reduces vision (even though the nictitating membrane is translucent),
while covering it too late is of little protective value. Capturing CR features like these is
challenging for models of classical conditioning.
The TD model does not include as part of its deﬁnition any mechanism for translat-
ing the time course of the US prediction, ˆv(St,wt), into a proﬁle that can be compared


--- Page 378 ---

356
Chapter 14: Psychology
with the properties of an animal’s CR. The simplest choice is to let the time course of
a simulated CR equal the time course of the US prediction. In this case, features of
simulated CRs and how they change over trials depend only on the stimulus representation
chosen and the values of the model’s parameters ↵, γ, and λ.
Figure 14.4 shows the time courses of US predictions at di↵erent points during learning
with the three representations shown in Figure 14.1.
For these simulations the US
occurred 25 time steps after the onset of the CS, and ↵= .05, λ = .95 and γ = .97.
With the CSC representation (Figure 14.4 left), the curve of the US prediction formed
by the TD model increases exponentially throughout the interval between the CS and
the US until it reaches a maximum exactly when the US occurs (at time step 25). This
exponential increase is the result of discounting in the TD model learning rule. With the
presence representation (Figure 14.4 middle), the US prediction is nearly constant while
the stimulus is present because there is only one weight, or associative strength, to be
learned for each stimulus. Consequently, the TD model with the presence representation
cannot recreate many features of CR timing. With an MS representation (Figure 14.4
right), the development of the TD model’s US prediction is more complicated. After 200
trials the prediction’s proﬁle is a reasonable approximation of the US prediction curve
produced with the CSC representation.
ˆv
ˆv
ˆv
Figure 14.4: Time course of US prediction over the course of acquisition for the TD model
with three di↵erent stimulus representations. Left: With the complete serial compound (CSC),
the US prediction increases exponentially through the interval, peaking at the time of the US.
At asymptote (trial 200), the US prediction peaks at the US intensity (1 in these simulations).
Middle: With the presence representation, the US prediction converges to an almost constant
level. This constant level is determined by the US intensity and the length of the CS–US interval.
Right: With the microstimulus representation, at asymptote, the TD model approximates the
exponentially increasing time course depicted with the CSC through a linear combination of the
di↵erent microstimuli. Adapted with minor changes from Learning & Behavior, Evaluating the
TD Model of Classical Conditioning, volume 40, 2012, E. A. Ludvig, R. S. Sutton, E. J. Kehoe.
With permission of Springer.
The US prediction curves shown in Figure 14.4 were not intended to precisely match
proﬁles of CRs as they develop during conditioning in any particular animal experiment,
but they illustrate the strong inﬂuence that the stimulus representation has on predictions
derived from the TD model. Further, although we can only mention it here, how the


--- Page 379 ---

14.3. Instrumental Conditioning
357
stimulus representation interacts with discounting and eligibility traces is important
in determining properties of the US prediction proﬁles produced by the TD model.
Another dimension beyond what we can discuss here is the inﬂuence of di↵erent response-
generation mechanisms that translate US predictions into CR proﬁles; the proﬁles shown
in Figure 14.4 are “raw” US prediction proﬁles. Even without any special assumption
about how an animal’s brain might produce overt responses from US predictions, however,
the proﬁles in Figure 14.4 for the CSC and MS representations increase as the time of the
US approaches and reach a maximum at the time of the US, as is seen in many animal
conditioning experiments.
The TD model, when combined with particular stimulus representations and response-
generation mechanisms, is able to account for a surprisingly wide range of phenomena
observed in animal classical conditioning experiments, but it is far from being a perfect
model. To generate other details of classical conditioning the model needs to be extended,
perhaps by adding model-based elements and mechanisms for adaptively altering some of
its parameters. Other approaches to modeling classical conditioning depart signiﬁcantly
from the Rescorla–Wagner-style error-correction process. Bayesian models, for example,
work within a probabilistic framework in which experience revises probability estimates.
All of these models usefully contribute to our understanding of classical conditioning.
Perhaps the most notable feature of the TD model is that it is based on a theory—the
theory we have described in this book—that suggests an account of what an animal’s
nervous system is trying to do while undergoing conditioning: it is trying to form accurate
long-term predictions, consistent with the limitations imposed by the way stimuli are
represented and how the nervous system works. In other words, it suggests a normative
account of classical conditioning in which long-term, instead of immediate, prediction is a
key feature.
The development of the TD model of classical conditioning is one instance in which the
explicit goal was to model some of the details of animal learning behavior. In addition to
its standing as an algorithm, then, TD learning is also the basis of this model of aspects
of biological learning. As we discuss in Chapter 15, TD learning has also turned out
to underlie an inﬂuential model of the activity of neurons that produce dopamine, a
chemical in the brain of mammals that is deeply involved in reward processing. These
are instances in which reinforcement learning theory makes detailed contact with animal
behavioral and neural data.
We now turn to considering correspondences between reinforcement learning and animal
behavior in instrumental conditioning experiments, the other major type of laboratory
experiment studied by animal learning psychologists.
14.3
Instrumental Conditioning
In instrumental conditioning experiments learning depends on the consequences of be-
havior: the delivery of a reinforcing stimulus is contingent on what the animal does.
In classical conditioning experiments, in contrast, the reinforcing stimulus—the US—is
delivered independently of the animal’s behavior. Instrumental conditioning is usually
considered to be the same as operant conditioning, the term B. F. Skinner (1938, 1963)


--- Page 380 ---

358
Chapter 14: Psychology
introduced for experiments with behavior-contingent reinforcement, though the experi-
ments and theories of those who use these two terms di↵er in a number of ways, some of
which we touch on below. We will exclusively use the term instrumental conditioning for
experiments in which reinforcement is contingent upon behavior. The roots of instrumen-
tal conditioning go back to experiments performed by the American psychologist Edward
Thorndike one hundred years before publication of the ﬁrst edition of this book.
One of Thorndike’s puzzle boxes.
Reprinted from Thorndike, Animal Intelligence:
An
Experimental Study of the Associative Processes in
Animals, The Psychological Review, Series of Mono-
graph Supplements II(4), Macmillan, New York, 1898.
Thorndike observed the behavior of cats
when they were placed in “puzzle boxes,”
such as the one at the right, from which
they could escape by appropriate actions.
For example, a cat could open the door
of one box by performing a sequence of
three separate actions: depressing a plat-
form at the back of the box, pulling a string
by clawing at it, and pushing a bar up or
down. When ﬁrst placed in a puzzle box,
with food visible outside, all but a few of
Thorndike’s cats displayed “evident signs
of discomfort” and extraordinarily vigorous
activity “to strive instinctively to escape
from conﬁnement” (Thorndike, 1898).
In experiments with di↵erent cats and
boxes with di↵erent escape mechanisms, Thorndike recorded the amounts of time each
cat took to escape over multiple experiences in each box. He observed that the time
almost invariably decreased with successive experiences, for example, from 300 seconds
to 6 or 7 seconds. He described cats’ behavior in a puzzle box like this:
The cat that is clawing all over the box in her impulsive struggle will probably
claw the string or loop or button so as to open the door. And gradually all the
other non-successful impulses will be stamped out and the particular impulse
leading to the successful act will be stamped in by the resulting pleasure,
until, after many trials, the cat will, when put in the box, immediately claw
the button or loop in a deﬁnite way. (Thorndike 1898, p. 13)
These and other experiments (some with dogs, chicks, monkeys, and even ﬁsh) led
Thorndike to formulate a number of “laws” of learning, the most inﬂuential being the
Law of E↵ect. This law describes what is generally known as learning by trial and
error. As we mentioned in Chapter 1, many aspects of the Law of E↵ect have generated
controversy, and its details have been modiﬁed over the years. Still the law—in one form
or another—expresses an enduring principle of learning.
Essential features of reinforcement learning algorithms correspond to features of animal
learning described by the Law of E↵ect. First, reinforcement learning algorithms are
selectional, meaning that they try alternatives and select among them by comparing their
consequences. Second, reinforcement learning algorithms are associative, meaning that
the alternatives found by selection are associated with particular situations, or states,
to form the agent’s policy. Like learning described by the Law of E↵ect, reinforcement


--- Page 381 ---

14.3. Instrumental Conditioning
359
learning is not just the process of ﬁnding actions that produce a lot of reward, but also
of connecting these actions to situations or states. Thorndike used the phrase learning
by “selecting and connecting” (Hilgard, 1956). Natural selection in evolution is a prime
example of a selectional process, but it is not associative (at least as it is commonly
understood); supervised learning is associative, but it is not selectional because it relies
on instructions that directly tell the agent how to change its behavior.
In computational terms, the Law of E↵ect describes an elementary way of combining
search and memory: search in the form of trying and selecting among many actions
in each situation, and memory in the form of associations linking situations with the
actions found—so far—to work best in those situations. Search and memory are essential
components of all reinforcement learning algorithms, whether memory takes the form of
an agent’s policy, value function, or environment model.
A reinforcement learning algorithm’s need to search means that it has to explore in
some way. Animals clearly explore as well, and early animal learning researchers disagreed
about the degree of guidance an animal uses in selecting its actions in situations like
Thorndike’s puzzle boxes. Are actions the result of “absolutely random, blind groping”
(Woodworth, 1938, p. 777), or is there some degree of guidance, either from prior learning,
reasoning, or other means? Although some thinkers, including Thorndike, seem to have
taken the former position, others favored more deliberate exploration. Reinforcement
learning algorithms allow wide latitude for how much guidance an agent can employ in
selecting actions. The forms of exploration we have used in the algorithms presented
in this book, such as "-greedy and upper-conﬁdence-bound action selection, are merely
among the simplest. More sophisticated methods are possible, with the only stipulation
being that there has to be some form of exploration for the algorithms to work e↵ectively.
The feature of our treatment of reinforcement learning allowing the set of actions
available at any time to depend on the environment’s current state echoes something
Thorndike observed in his cats’ puzzle-box behaviors. The cats selected actions from
those that they instinctively perform in their current situation, which Thorndike called
their “instinctual impulses.” First placed in a puzzle box, a cat instinctively scratches,
claws, and bites with great energy: a cat’s instinctual responses to ﬁnding itself in a
conﬁned space. Successful actions are selected from these and not from every possible
action or activity. This is like the feature of our formalism where the action selected
from a state s belongs to a set of admissible actions, A(s). Specifying these sets is an
important aspect of reinforcement learning because it can radically simplify learning.
They are like an animal’s instinctual impulses. On the other hand, Thorndike’s cats might
have been exploring according to an instinctual context-speciﬁc ordering over actions
rather than by just selecting from a set of instinctual impulses. This is another way to
make reinforcement learning easier.
Among the most prominent animal learning researchers inﬂuenced by the Law of E↵ect
were Clark Hull (e.g., Hull, 1943) and B. F. Skinner (e.g., Skinner, 1938). At the center
of their research was the idea of selecting behavior on the basis of its consequences.
Reinforcement learning has features in common with Hull’s theory, which included
eligibility-like mechanisms and secondary reinforcement to account for the ability to learn
when there is a signiﬁcant time interval between an action and the consequent reinforcing


--- Page 382 ---

360
Chapter 14: Psychology
stimulus (see Section 14.4). Randomness also played a role in Hull’s theory through what
he called “behavioral oscillation” to introduce exploratory behavior.
Skinner did not fully subscribe to the memory aspect of the Law of E↵ect. Being averse
to the idea of associative linkages, he instead emphasized selection from spontaneously-
emitted behavior. He introduced the term “operant” to emphasize the key role of an
action’s e↵ects on an animal’s environment. Unlike the experiments of Thorndike and
others, which consisted of sequences of separate trials, Skinner’s operant conditioning
experiments allowed animal subjects to behave for extended periods of time without
interruption. He invented the operant conditioning chamber, now called a “Skinner box,”
the most basic version of which contains a lever or key that an animal can press to obtain
a reward, such as food or water, which would be delivered according to a well-deﬁned rule,
called a reinforcement schedule. By recording the cumulative number of lever presses
as a function of time, Skinner and his followers could investigate the e↵ect of di↵erent
reinforcement schedules on the animal’s rate of lever-pressing. Modeling results from
experiments likes these using the reinforcement learning principles we present in this
book is not well developed, but we mention some exceptions in the Bibliographic and
Historical Remarks section at the end of this chapter.
Another of Skinner’s contributions resulted from his recognition of the e↵ectiveness of
training an animal by reinforcing successive approximations of the desired behavior, a
process he called shaping. Although this technique had been used by others, including
Skinner himself, its signiﬁcance was impressed upon him when he and colleagues were
attempting to train a pigeon to bowl by swiping a wooden ball with its beak. After
waiting for a long time without seeing any swipe that they could reinforce, they
... decided to reinforce any response that had the slightest resemblance to
a swipe—perhaps, at ﬁrst, merely the behavior of looking at the ball—and
then to select responses which more closely approximated the ﬁnal form. The
result amazed us. In a few minutes, the ball was caroming o↵the walls of
the box as if the pigeon had been a champion squash player. (Skinner, 1958,
p. 94)
Not only did the pigeon learn a behavior that is unusual for pigeons, it learned quickly
through an interactive process in which its behavior and the reinforcement contingencies
changed in response to each other. Skinner compared the process of altering reinforcement
contingencies to the work of a sculptor shaping clay into a desired form. Shaping is a
powerful technique for computational reinforcement learning systems as well. When it is
diﬃcult for an agent to receive any non-zero reward signal at all, either due to sparseness
of rewarding situations or their inaccessibility given initial behavior, starting with an
easier problem and incrementally increasing its diﬃculty as the agent learns can be an
e↵ective, and sometimes indispensable, strategy.
A concept from psychology that is especially relevant in the context of instrumental
conditioning is motivation, which refers to processes that inﬂuence the direction and
strength, or vigor, of behavior. Thorndike’s cats, for example, were motivated to escape
from puzzle boxes because they wanted the food that was sitting just outside. Obtaining
this goal was rewarding to them and reinforced the actions allowing them to escape. It
is diﬃcult to link the concept of motivation, which has many dimensions, in a precise


--- Page 383 ---

14.4. Delayed Reinforcement
361
way to reinforcement learning’s computational perspective, but there are clear links with
some of its dimensions.
In one sense, a reinforcement learning agent’s reward signal is at the base of its
motivation: the agent is motivated to maximize the total reward it receives over the long
run. A key facet of motivation, then, is what makes an agent’s experience rewarding. In
reinforcement learning, reward signals depend on the state of the reinforcement learning
agent’s environment and the agent’s actions. Further, as pointed out in Chapter 1, the
state of the agent’s environment not only includes information about what is external to
the machine, like an organism or a robot, that houses the agent, but also what is internal
to this machine. Some internal state components correspond to what psychologists call
an animal’s motivational state, which inﬂuences what is rewarding to the animal. For
example, an animal will be more rewarded by eating when it is hungry than when it has
just ﬁnished a satisfying meal. The concept of state dependence is broad enough to allow
for many types of modulating inﬂuences on the generation of reward signals.
Value functions provide a further link to psychologists’ concept of motivation. If the
most basic motive for selecting an action is to obtain as much reward as possible, for a
reinforcement learning agent that selects actions using a value function, a more proximal
motive is to ascend the gradient of its value function, that is, to select actions expected
to lead to the most highly-valued next states (or what is essentially the same thing, to
select actions with the greatest action-values). For these agents, value functions are the
main driving force determining the direction of their behavior.
Another dimension of motivation is that an animal’s motivational state not only
inﬂuences learning, but also inﬂuences the strength, or vigor, of the animal’s behavior
after learning. For example, after learning to ﬁnd food in the goal box of a maze, a hungry
rat will run faster to the goal box than one that is not hungry. This aspect of motivation
does not link so cleanly to the reinforcement learning framework we present here, but
in the Bibliographical and Historical Remarks section at the end of this chapter we cite
several publications that propose theories of behavioral vigor based on reinforcement
learning.
We turn now to the subject of learning when reinforcing stimuli occur well after the
events they reinforce. The mechanisms used by reinforcement learning algorithms to
enable learning with delayed reinforcement—eligibility traces and TD learning—closely
correspond to psychologists’ hypotheses about how animals can learn under these condi-
tions.
14.4
Delayed Reinforcement
The Law of E↵ect requires a backward e↵ect on connections, and some early critics of the
law could not conceive of how the present could a↵ect something that was in the past. This
concern was ampliﬁed by the fact that learning can even occur when there is a considerable
delay between an action and the consequent reward or penalty. Similarly, in classical
conditioning, learning can occur when US onset follows CS o↵set by a non-negligible time
interval. We call this the problem of delayed reinforcement, which is related to what
Minsky (1961) called the “credit-assignment problem for learning systems”: how do you


--- Page 384 ---

362
Chapter 14: Psychology
distribute credit for success among the many decisions that may have been involved in
producing it? The reinforcement learning algorithms presented in this book include two
basic mechanisms for addressing this problem. The ﬁrst is the use of eligibility traces,
and the second is the use of TD methods to learn value functions that provide nearly
immediate evaluations of actions (in tasks like instrumental conditioning experiments) or
that provide immediate prediction targets (in tasks like classical conditioning experiments).
Both of these methods correspond to similar mechanisms proposed in theories of animal
learning.
Pavlov (1927) pointed out that every stimulus must leave a trace in the nervous system
that persists for some time after the stimulus ends, and he proposed that stimulus traces
make learning possible when there is a temporal gap between the CS o↵set and the
US onset. To this day, conditioning under these conditions is called trace conditioning
(page 344). Assuming a trace of the CS remains when the US arrives, learning occurs
through the simultaneous presence of the trace and the US. We discuss some proposals
for trace mechanisms in the nervous system in Chapter 15.
Stimulus traces were also proposed as a means for bridging the time interval between
actions and consequent rewards or penalties in instrumental conditioning. In Hull’s
inﬂuential learning theory, for example, “molar stimulus traces” accounted for what
he called an animal’s goal gradient, a description of how the maximum strength of an
instrumentally-conditioned response decreases with increasing delay of reinforcement
(Hull, 1932, 1943). Hull hypothesized that an animal’s actions leave internal stimuli whose
traces decay exponentially as functions of time since an action was taken. Looking at the
animal learning data available at the time, he hypothesized that the traces e↵ectively
reach zero after 30 to 40 seconds.
The eligibility traces used in the algorithms described in this book are like Hull’s
traces: they are decaying traces of past state visitations, or of past state–action pairs.
Eligibility traces were introduced by Klopf (1972) in his neuronal theory in which they
are temporally-extended traces of past activity at synapses, the connections between
neurons. Klopf’s traces are more complex than the exponentially-decaying traces our
algorithms use, and we discuss this more when we take up his theory in Section 15.9.
To account for goal gradients that extend over longer time periods than spanned
by stimulus traces, Hull (1943) proposed that longer gradients result from conditioned
reinforcement passing backwards from the goal, a process acting in conjunction with
his molar stimulus traces.
Animal experiments showed that if conditions favor the
development of conditioned reinforcement during a delay period, learning does not
decrease with increased delay as much as it does under conditions that obstruct secondary
reinforcement. Conditioned reinforcement is favored if there are stimuli that regularly
occur during the delay interval. Then it is as if reward is not actually delayed because
there is more immediate conditioned reinforcement. Hull therefore envisioned that there
is a primary gradient based on the delay of the primary reinforcement mediated by
stimulus traces, and that this is progressively modiﬁed, and lengthened, by conditioned
reinforcement.
Algorithms presented in this book that use both eligibility traces and value functions
to enable learning with delayed reinforcement correspond to Hull’s hypothesis about how
animals are able to learn under these conditions. The actor–critic architecture discussed


--- Page 385 ---

14.5. Cognitive Maps
363
in Sections 13.5, 15.7, and 15.8 illustrates this correspondence most clearly. The critic uses
a TD algorithm to learn a value function associated with the system’s current behavior,
that is, to predict the current policy’s return. The actor updates the current policy based
on the critic’s predictions, or more exactly, on changes in the critic’s predictions. The
TD error produced by the critic acts as a conditioned reinforcement signal for the actor,
providing an immediate evaluation of performance even when the primary reward signal
itself is considerably delayed. Algorithms that estimate action-value functions, such as
Q-learning and Sarsa, similarly use TD learning principles to enable learning with delayed
reinforcement by means of conditioned reinforcement. The close parallel between TD
learning and the activity of dopamine producing neurons that we discuss in Chapter 15
lends additional support to links between reinforcement learning algorithms and this
aspect of Hull’s learning theory.
14.5
Cognitive Maps
Model-based reinforcement learning algorithms use environment models that have elements
in common with what psychologists call cognitive maps. Recall from our discussion of
planning and learning in Chapter 8 that by an environment model we mean anything
an agent can use to predict how its environment will respond to its actions in terms of
state transitions and rewards, and by planning we mean any process that computes a
policy from such a model. Environment models consist of two parts: the state-transition
part encodes knowledge about the e↵ect of actions on state changes, and the reward-
model part encodes knowledge about the reward signals expected for each state or each
state–action pair. A model-based algorithm selects actions by using a model to predict
the consequences of possible courses of action in terms of future states and the reward
signals expected to arise from those states. The simplest kind of planning is to compare
the predicted consequences of collections of “imagined” sequences of decisions.
Questions about whether or not animals use environment models, and if so, what are the
models like and how are they learned, have played inﬂuential roles in the history of animal
learning research. Some researchers challenged the then-prevailing stimulus-response
(S–R) view of learning and behavior, which corresponds to the simplest model-free way
of learning policies, by demonstrating latent learning. In the earliest latent learning
experiment, two groups of rats were run in a maze. For the experimental group, there
was no reward during the ﬁrst stage of the experiment, but food was suddenly introduced
into the goal box of the maze at the start of the second stage. For the control group, food
was in the goal box throughout both stages. The question was whether or not rats in the
experimental group would have learned anything during the ﬁrst stage in the absence
of food reward. Although the experimental rats did not appear to learn much during
the ﬁrst, unrewarded, stage, as soon as they discovered the food that was introduced
in the second stage, they rapidly caught up with the rats in the control group. It was
concluded that “during the non-reward period, the rats [in the experimental group] were
developing a latent learning of the maze which they were able to utilize as soon as reward
was introduced” (Blodgett, 1929).


--- Page 386 ---

364
Chapter 14: Psychology
Latent learning is most closely associated with the psychologist Edward Tolman, who
interpreted this result, and others like it, as showing that animals could learn a “cognitive
map of the environment” in the absence of rewards or penalties, and that they could use
the map later when they were motivated to reach a goal (Tolman, 1948). A cognitive map
could also allow a rat to plan a route to the goal that was di↵erent from the route the rat
had used in its initial exploration. Explanations of results like these led to the enduring
controversy lying at the heart of the behaviorist/cognitive dichotomy in psychology. In
modern terms, cognitive maps are not restricted to models of spatial layouts but are
more generally environment models, or models of an animal’s “task space” (e.g., Wilson,
Takahashi, Schoenbaum, and Niv, 2014). The cognitive map explanation of latent learning
experiments is analogous to the claim that animals use model-based algorithms, and that
environment models can be learned even without explicit rewards or penalties. Models
are then used for planning when the animal is motivated by the appearance of rewards or
penalties.
Tolman’s account of how animals learn cognitive maps was that they learn stimulus-
stimulus, or S–S, associations by experiencing successions of stimuli as they explore an
environment. In psychology this is called expectancy theory: given S–S associations, the
occurrence of a stimulus generates an expectation about the stimulus to come next. This
is much like what control engineers call system identiﬁcation, in which a model of a
system with unknown dynamics is learned from labeled training examples. In the simplest
discrete-time versions, training examples are S–S0 pairs, where S is a state and S0, the
subsequent state, is the label. When S is observed, the model creates the “expectation”
that S0 will be observed next. Models more useful for planning involve actions as well,
so that examples look like SA–S0, where S0 is expected when action A is executed in
state S. It is also useful to learn how the environment generates rewards. In this case,
examples are of the form S–R or SA–R, where R is a reward signal associated with S or
the SA pair. These are all forms of supervised learning by which an agent can acquire
cognitive-like maps whether or not it receives any non-zero reward signals while exploring
its environment.
14.6
Habitual and Goal-directed Behavior
The distinction between model-free and model-based reinforcement learning algorithms
corresponds to the distinction psychologists make between habitual and goal-directed
control of learned behavioral patterns. Habits are behavior patterns triggered by appro-
priate stimuli and then performed more-or-less automatically. Goal-directed behavior,
according to how psychologists use the phrase, is purposeful in the sense that it is con-
trolled by knowledge of the value of goals and the relationship between actions and their
consequences. Habits are sometimes said to be controlled by antecedent stimuli, whereas
goal-directed behavior is said to be controlled by its consequences (Dickinson, 1980,
1985). Goal-directed control has the advantage that it can rapidly change an animal’s
behavior when the environment changes its way of reacting to the animal’s actions. While
habitual behavior responds quickly to input from an accustomed environment, it is unable


--- Page 387 ---

14.6. Habitual and Goal-directed Behavior
365
to quickly adjust to changes in the environment. The development of goal-directed
behavioral control was likely a major advance in the evolution of animal intelligence.
Figure 14.5 illustrates the di↵erence between model-free and model-based decision
strategies in a hypothetical task in which a rat has to navigate a maze that has distinctive
goal boxes, each delivering an associated reward of the magnitude shown (Figure 14.5
top). Starting at S1, the rat has to ﬁrst select left (L) or right (R) and then has to select
L or R again at S2 or S3 to reach one of the goal boxes. The goal boxes are the terminal
states of each episode of the rat’s episodic task. A model-free strategy (Figure 14.5 lower
left) relies on stored values for state–action pairs. These action values are estimates of
the highest return the rat can expect for each action taken from each (nonterminal) state.
They are obtained over many trials of running the maze from start to ﬁnish. When the
action values have become good enough estimates of the optimal returns, the rat just has
S1, L
S2, L
S2, R
S3, L
S3, R
S1, R
4
3
0
4
3
2
Model-Free
= 4
= 0
= 2
= 3
Reward
Model-Based
S1
L
R
S2
S3
L
R
L
R
(4)
S2
S3
S1
4
0
2
3
Figure 14.5: Model-based and model-free strategies to solve a hypothetical sequential action-
selection problem. Top: a rat navigates a maze with distinctive goal boxes, each associated
with a reward having the value shown. Lower left: a model-free strategy relies on stored action
values for all the state–action pairs obtained over many learning trials. To make decisions the
rat just has to select at each state the action with the largest action value for that state. Lower
right: in a model-based strategy, the rat learns an environment model, consisting of knowledge
of state–action-next-state transitions and a reward model consisting of knowledge of the reward
associated with each distinctive goal box. The rat can decide which way to turn at each state
by using the model to simulate sequences of action choices to ﬁnd a path yielding the highest
return. Adapted from Trends in Cognitive Science, volume 10, number 8, Y. Niv, D. Joel, and P.
Dayan, A Normative Perspective on Motivation, p. 376, 2006, with permission from Elsevier.


--- Page 388 ---

366
Chapter 14: Psychology
to select at each state the action with the largest action value in order to make optimal
decisions. In this case, when the action-value estimates become accurate enough, the
rat selects L from S1 and R from S2 to obtain the maximum return of 4. A di↵erent
model-free strategy might simply rely on a cached policy instead of action values, making
direct links from S1 to L and from S2 to R. In neither of these strategies do decisions
rely on an environment model. There is no need to consult a state-transition model, and
no connection is required between the features of the goal boxes and the rewards they
deliver.
Figure 14.5 (lower right) illustrates a model-based strategy. It uses an environment
model consisting of a state-transition model and a reward model. The state-transition
model is shown as a decision tree, and the reward model associates the distinctive features
of the goal boxes with the rewards to be found in each. (The rewards associated with
states S1, S2, and S3 are also part of the reward model, but here they are zero and are
not shown.) A model-based agent can decide which way to turn at each state by using
the model to simulate sequences of action choices to ﬁnd a path yielding the highest
return. In this case the return is the reward obtained from the outcome at the end of
the path. Here, with a suﬃciently accurate model, the rat would select L and then R
to obtain a return of 4. Comparing the predicted returns of simulated paths is a simple
form of planning, which can be done in a variety of ways as discussed in Chapter 8.
When the environment of a model-free agent changes the way it reacts to the agent’s
actions, the agent has to acquire new experience in the changed environment during
which it can update its policy and/or value function. In the model-free strategy shown
in Figure 14.5 (lower left), for example, if one of the goal boxes were to somehow shift
to delivering a di↵erent reward, the rat would have to traverse the maze, possibly many
times, to experience the new reward upon reaching that goal box, all the while updating
either its policy or its action-value function (or both) based on this experience. The key
point is that for a model-free agent to change the action its policy speciﬁes for a state, or
to change an action value associated with a state, it has to move to that state, act from
it, possibly many times, and experience the consequences of its actions.
A model-based agent can accommodate changes in its environment without this kind
of ‘personal experience’ with the states and actions a↵ected by the change. A change in
its model automatically (through planning) changes its policy. Planning can determine
the consequences of changes in the environment that have never been linked together in
the agent’s own experience. For example, again referring to the maze task of Figure 14.5,
imagine that a rat with a previously learned transition and reward model is placed directly
in the goal box to the right of S2 to ﬁnd that the reward available there now has value 1
instead of 4. The rat’s reward model will change even though the action choices required
to ﬁnd that goal box in the maze were not involved. The planning process will bring
knowledge of the new reward to bear on maze running without the need for additional
experience in the maze; in this case changing the policy to right turns at both S1 and S3
to obtain a return of 3.
Exactly this logic is the basis of outcome-devaluation experiments with animals. Results
from these experiments provide insight into whether an animal has learned a habit or if
its behavior is under goal-directed control. Outcome-devaluation experiments are like
latent-learning experiments in that the reward changes from one stage to the next. After


--- Page 389 ---

14.6. Habitual and Goal-directed Behavior
367
an initial rewarded stage of learning, the reward value of an outcome is changed, including
being shifted to zero or even to a negative value.
An early important experiment of this type was conducted by Adams and Dickinson
(1981). They trained rats via instrumental conditioning until the rats energetically pressed
a lever for sucrose pellets in a training chamber. The rats were then placed in the same
chamber with the lever retracted and allowed non-contingent food, meaning that pellets
were made available to them independently of their actions. After 15-minutes of this
free-access to the pellets, rats in one group were injected with the nausea-inducing poison
lithium chloride. This was repeated for three sessions, in the last of which none of the
injected rats consumed any of the non-contingent pellets, indicating that the reward
value of the pellets had been decreased—the pellets had been devalued. In the next stage
taking place a day later, the rats were again placed in the chamber and given a session of
extinction training, meaning that the response lever was back in place but disconnected
from the pellet dispenser so that pressing it did not release pellets. The question was
whether the rats that had the reward value of the pellets decreased would lever-press
less than rats that did not have the reward value of the pellets decreased, even without
experiencing the devalued reward as a result of lever-pressing. It turned out that the
injected rats had signiﬁcantly lower response rates than the non-injected rats right from
the start of the extinction trials.
Adams and Dickinson concluded that the injected rats associated lever pressing with
consequent nausea by means of a cognitive map linking lever pressing to pellets, and
pellets to nausea. Hence, in the extinction trials, the rats “knew” that the consequences
of pressing the lever would be something they did not want, and so they reduced their
lever-pressing right from the start. The important point is that they reduced lever-pressing
without ever having experienced lever-pressing directly followed by being sick: no lever
was present when they were made sick. They seemed able to combine knowledge of the
outcome of a behavioral choice (pressing the lever will be followed by getting a pellet)
with the reward value of the outcome (pellets are to be avoided) and hence could alter
their behavior accordingly. Not every psychologist agrees with this “cognitive” account
of this kind of experiment, and it is not the only possible way to explain these results,
but the model-based planning explanation is widely accepted.
Nothing prevents an agent from using both model-free and model-based algorithms, and
there are good reasons for using both. We know from our own experience that with enough
repetition, goal-directed behavior tends to turn into habitual behavior. Experiments show
that this happens for rats too. Adams (1982) conducted an experiment to see if extended
training would convert goal-directed behavior into habitual behavior. He did this by
comparing the e↵ect of outcome devaluation on rats that experienced di↵erent amounts
of training. If extended training made the rats less sensitive to devaluation compared to
rats that received less training, this would be evidence that extended training made the
behavior more habitual. Adams’ experiment closely followed the Adams and Dickinson
(1981) experiment just described. Simplifying a bit, rats in one group were trained until
they made 100 rewarded lever-presses, and rats in the other group—the overtrained
group—were trained until they made 500 rewarded lever-presses. After this training,
the reward value of the pellets was decreased (using lithium chloride injections) for rats


--- Page 390 ---

368
Chapter 14: Psychology
in both groups. Then both groups of rats were given a session of extinction training.
Adams’ question was whether devaluation would e↵ect the rate of lever-pressing for the
overtrained rats less than it would for the non-overtrained rats, which would be evidence
that extended training reduces sensitivity to outcome devaluation. It turned out that
devaluation strongly decreased the lever-pressing rate of the non-overtrained rats. For
the overtrained rats, in contrast, devaluation had little e↵ect on their lever-pressing; in
fact, if anything, it made it more vigorous. (The full experiment included control groups
showing that the di↵erent amounts of training did not by themselves signiﬁcantly e↵ect
lever-pressing rates after learning.) This result suggested that while the non-overtrained
rats were acting in a goal-directed manner sensitive to their knowledge of the outcome of
their actions, the overtrained rats had developed a lever-pressing habit.
Viewing this and other results like it from a computational perspective provides insight
as to why one might expect animals to behave habitually in some circumstances but in a
goal-directed way in others, and why they shift from one mode of control to another as
they continue to learn. While animals undoubtedly use algorithms that do not exactly
match those we have presented in this book, one can gain insight into animal behavior by
considering the tradeo↵s that various reinforcement learning algorithms imply. An idea
developed by computational neuroscientists Daw, Niv, and Dayan (2005) is that animals
use both model-free and model-based processes. Each process proposes an action, and
the action chosen for execution is the one proposed by the process judged to be the more
trustworthy of the two as determined by measures of conﬁdence that are maintained
throughout learning. Early in learning the planning process of a model-based system is
more trustworthy because it chains together short-term predictions which can become
accurate with less experience than long-term predictions of the model-free process. But
with continued experience, the model-free process becomes more trustworthy because
planning is prone to making mistakes due to model inaccuracies and short-cuts necessary
to make planning feasible, such as various forms of “tree-pruning”: the removal of
unpromising search tree branches. According to this idea one would expect a shift from
goal-directed behavior to habitual behavior as more experience accumulates. Other ideas
have been proposed for how animals arbitrate between goal-directed and habitual control,
and both behavioral and neuroscience research continues to examine this and related
questions.
The distinction between model-free and model-based algorithms is proving to be useful
for this research. One can examine the computational implications of these types of
algorithms in abstract settings that expose basic advantages and limitations of each
type.
This serves both to suggest and to sharpen questions that guide the design
of experiments necessary for increasing psychologists’ understanding of habitual and
goal-directed behavioral control.
14.7
Summary
Our goal in this chapter has been to discuss correspondences between reinforcement
learning and the experimental study of animal learning in psychology. We emphasized
at the outset that reinforcement learning as described in this book is not intended


--- Page 391 ---

14.7. Summary
369
to model details of animal behavior. It is an abstract computational framework that
explores idealized situations from the perspective of artiﬁcial intelligence and engineering.
But many of the basic reinforcement learning algorithms were inspired by psychological
theories, and in some cases, these algorithms have contributed to the development of
new animal learning models. This chapter described the most conspicuous of these
correspondences.
The distinction in reinforcement learning between algorithms for prediction and al-
gorithms for control parallels animal learning theory’s distinction between classical, or
Pavlovian, conditioning and instrumental conditioning.
The key di↵erence between
instrumental and classical conditioning experiments is that in the former the reinforcing
stimulus is contingent upon the animal’s behavior, whereas in the latter it is not. Learning
to predict via a TD algorithm corresponds to classical conditioning, and we described
the TD model of classical conditioning as one instance in which reinforcement learning
principles account for some details of animal learning behavior. This model generalizes
the inﬂuential Rescorla–Wagner model by including the temporal dimension where events
within individual trials inﬂuence learning, and it provides an account of second-order
conditioning, where predictors of reinforcing stimuli become reinforcing themselves. It
also is the basis of an inﬂuential view of the activity of dopamine neurons in the brain,
something we take up in Chapter 15.
Learning by trial and error is at the base of the control aspect of reinforcement learning.
We presented some details about Thorndike’s experiments with cats and other animals that
led to his Law of E↵ect, which we discussed here and in Chapter 1 (page 15). We pointed
out that in reinforcement learning, exploration does not have to be limited to “blind
groping”; trials can be generated by sophisticated methods using innate and previously
learned knowledge as long as there is some exploration. We discussed the training method
B. F. Skinner called shaping in which reward contingencies are progressively altered to
train an animal to successively approximate a desired behavior. Shaping is not only
indispensable for animal training, it is also an e↵ective tool for training reinforcement
learning agents. There is also a connection to the idea of an animal’s motivational state,
which inﬂuences what an animal will approach or avoid and what events are rewarding
or punishing for the animal.
The reinforcement learning algorithms presented in this book include two basic mecha-
nisms for addressing the problem of delayed reinforcement: eligibility traces and value
functions learned via TD algorithms. Both mechanisms have antecedents in theories of
animal learning. Eligibility traces are similar to stimulus traces of early theories, and
value functions correspond to the role of secondary reinforcement in providing nearly
immediate evaluative feedback.
The next correspondence the chapter addressed is that between reinforcement learning’s
environment models and what psychologists call cognitive maps. Experiments conducted
in the mid 20th century purported to demonstrate the ability of animals to learn cognitive
maps as alternatives to, or as additions to, state–action associations, and later use them
to guide behavior, especially when the environment changes unexpectedly. Environment
models in reinforcement learning are like cognitive maps in that they can be learned by
supervised learning methods without relying on reward signals, and then they can be
used later to plan behavior.


--- Page 392 ---

370
Chapter 14: Psychology
Reinforcement learning’s distinction between model-free and model-based algorithms
corresponds to the distinction in psychology between habitual and goal-directed behavior.
Model-free algorithms make decisions by accessing information that has been stored in a
policy or an action-value function, whereas model-based methods select actions as the
result of planning ahead using a model of the agent’s environment. Outcome-devaluation
experiments provide information about whether an animal’s behavior is habitual or under
goal-directed control. Reinforcement learning theory has helped clarify thinking about
these issues.
Animal learning clearly informs reinforcement learning, but as a type of machine
learning, reinforcement learning is directed toward designing and understanding e↵ective
learning algorithms, not toward replicating or explaining details of animal behavior.
We focused on aspects of animal learning that relate in clear ways to methods for
solving prediction and control problems, highlighting the fruitful two-way ﬂow of ideas
between reinforcement learning and psychology without venturing deeply into many of the
behavioral details and controversies that have occupied the attention of animal learning
researchers. Future development of reinforcement learning theory and algorithms will
likely exploit links to many other features of animal learning as the computational utility
of these features becomes better appreciated. We expect that a ﬂow of ideas between
reinforcement learning and psychology will continue to bear fruit for both disciplines.
Many connections between reinforcement learning and areas of psychology and other
behavioral sciences are beyond the scope of this chapter. We largely omit discussing
links to the psychology of decision making, which focuses on how actions are selected,
or how decisions are made, after learning has taken place. We also do not discuss links
to ecological and evolutionary aspects of behavior studied by ethologists and behavioral
ecologists: how animals relate to one another and to their physical surroundings, and how
their behavior contributes to evolutionary ﬁtness. Optimization, MDPs, and dynamic
programming ﬁgure prominently in these ﬁelds, and our emphasis on agent interaction
with dynamic environments connects to the study of agent behavior in complex “ecologies.”
Multi-agent reinforcement learning, omitted in this book, has connections to social aspects
of behavior. Despite the lack of treatment here, reinforcement learning should by no means
be interpreted as dismissing evolutionary perspectives. Nothing about reinforcement
learning implies a tabula rasa view of learning and behavior. Indeed, experience with
engineering applications has highlighted the importance of building into reinforcement
learning systems knowledge that is analogous to what evolution provides to animals.


--- Page 393 ---

14.7. Summary
371
Bibliographical and Historical Remarks
Ludvig, Bellemare, and Pearson (2011) and Shah (2012) review reinforcement learning in
the contexts of psychology and neuroscience. These publications are useful companions
to this chapter and the following chapter on reinforcement learning and neuroscience.
14.1
Dayan, Niv, Seymour, and Daw (2006) focused on interactions between clas-
sical and instrumental conditioning, particularly situations where classically-
conditioned and instrumental responses are in conﬂict. They proposed a Q-
learning framework for modeling aspects of this interaction. Modayil and Sutton
(2014) used a mobile robot to demonstrate the e↵ectiveness of a control method
combining a ﬁxed response with online prediction learning. Calling this Pavlo-
vian control, they emphasized that it di↵ers from the usual control methods of
reinforcement learning, being based on predictively executing ﬁxed responses
and not on reward maximization. The electro-mechanical machine of Ross (1933)
and especially the learning version of Walter’s turtle (Walter, 1951) were very
early illustrations of Pavlovian control.
14.2.1 Kamin (1968) ﬁrst reported blocking, now commonly known as Kamin blocking,
in classical conditioning.
Moore and Schmajuk (2008) provide an excellent
summary of the blocking phenomenon, the research it stimulated, and its lasting
inﬂuence on animal learning theory. Gibbs, Cool, Land, Kehoe, and Gormezano
(1991) describe second-order conditioning of the rabbit’s nictitating membrane
response and its relationship to conditioning with serial-compound stimuli. Finch
and Culler (1934) reported obtaining ﬁfth-order conditioning of a dog’s foreleg
withdrawal “when the motivation of the animal is maintained through the various
orders.”
14.2.2 The idea built into the Rescorla–Wagner model that learning occurs when animals
are surprised is derived from Kamin (1969). Models of classical conditioning
other than Rescorla and Wagner’s include the models of Klopf (1988), Grossberg
(1975), Mackintosh (1975), Moore and Stickney (1980), Pearce and Hall (1980),
and Courville, Daw, and Touretzky (2006). Schmajuk (2008) reviews models of
classical conditioning. Wagner (2008) provides a modern psychological perspective
on the Rescorla-Wagner model and similar elemental theories of learning.
14.2.3 An early version of the TD model of classical conditioning appeared in Sutton and
Barto (1981a), which also included the early model’s prediction that temporal
primacy overrides blocking, later shown by Kehoe, Schreurs, and Graham (1987)
to occur in the rabbit nictitating membrane preparation. Sutton and Barto
(1981a) contains the earliest recognition of the near identity between the Rescorla–
Wagner model and the Least-Mean-Square (LMS), or Widrow-Ho↵, learning
rule (Widrow and Ho↵, 1960). This early model was revised following Sutton’s
development of the TD algorithm (Sutton, 1984, 1988) and was ﬁrst presented as
the TD model in Sutton and Barto (1987) and more completely in Sutton and
Barto (1990), upon which this section is largely based. Additional exploration


--- Page 394 ---

372
Chapter 14: Psychology
of the TD model and its possible neural implementation was conducted by
Moore and colleagues (Moore, Desmond, Berthier, Blazis, Sutton, and Barto,
1986; Moore and Blazis, 1989; Moore, Choi, and Brunzell, 1998; Moore, Marks,
Castagna, and Polewan, 2001). Klopf’s (1988) drive-reinforcement theory of
classical conditioning extends the TD model to address additional experimental
details, such as the S-shape of acquisition curves. In some of these publications
TD is taken to mean Time Derivative instead of Temporal Di↵erence.
14.2.4 Ludvig, Sutton, and Kehoe (2012) evaluated the performance of the TD model
in previously unexplored tasks involving classical conditioning and examined
the inﬂuence of various stimulus representations, including the microstimulus
representation that they introduced earlier (Ludvig, Sutton, and Kehoe, 2008).
Earlier investigations of the inﬂuence of various stimulus representations and their
possible neural implementations on response timing and topography in the context
of the TD model are those of Moore and colleagues cited above. Although not in
the context of the TD model, representations like the microstimulus representation
of Ludvig et al. (2012) have been proposed and studied by Grossberg and
Schmajuk (1989), Brown, Bullock, and Grossberg (1999), Buhusi and Schmajuk
(1999), and Machado (1997). The ﬁgures on pages 353–355 are adapted from
Sutton and Barto (1990).
14.3
Section 1.7 includes comments on the history of trial-and-error learning and
the Law of E↵ect. The idea that Thorndike’s cats might have been exploring
according to an instinctual context-speciﬁc ordering over actions rather than by
just selecting from a set of instinctual impulses was suggested by Peter Dayan
(personal communication). Selfridge, Sutton, and Barto (1985) illustrated the
e↵ectiveness of shaping in a pole-balancing reinforcement learning task. Other
examples of shaping in reinforcement learning are Gullapalli and Barto (1992),
Mahadevan and Connell (1992), Mataric (1994), Dorigo and Colombette (1994),
Saksida, Raymond, and Touretzky (1997), and Randløv and Alstrøm (1998). Ng
(2003) and Ng, Harada, and Russell (1999) used the term shaping in a sense
somewhat di↵erent from Skinner’s, focusing on the problem of how to alter the
reward signal without altering the set of optimal policies.
Dickinson and Balleine (2002) discuss the complexity of the interaction between
learning and motivation. Wise (2004) provides an overview of reinforcement
learning and its relation to motivation. Daw and Shohamy (2008) link motivation
and learning to aspects of reinforcement learning theory. See also McClure,
Daw, and Montague (2003), Niv, Joel, and Dayan (2006), Rangel, Camerer, and
Montague (2008), and Dayan and Berridge (2014). McClure et al. (2003), Niv,
Daw, and Dayan (2006), and Niv, Daw, Joel, and Dayan (2007) present theories
of behavioral vigor related to the reinforcement learning framework.
14.4
Spence, Hull’s student and collaborator at Yale, elaborated the role of higher-
order reinforcement in addressing the problem of delayed reinforcement (Spence,
1947). Learning over very long delays, as in taste-aversion conditioning with


--- Page 395 ---

14.7. Summary
373
delays up to several hours, led to interference theories as alternatives to decaying-
trace theories (e.g., Revusky and Garcia, 1970; Boakes and Costa, 2014). Other
views of learning under delayed reinforcement invoke roles for awareness and
working memory (e.g., Clark and Squire, 1998; Seo, Barraclough, and Lee, 2007).
14.5
Thistlethwaite (1951) provides an extensive review of latent learning experiments
up to the time of its publication. Ljung (1998) provides an overview of model
learning, or system identiﬁcation, techniques in engineering. Gopnik, Glymour,
Sobel, Schulz, Kushnir, and Danks (2004) present a Bayesian theory about how
children learn models.
14.6
Connections between habitual and goal-directed behavior and model-free and
model-based reinforcement learning were ﬁrst proposed by Daw, Niv, and Dayan
(2005). The hypothetical maze task used to explain habitual and goal-directed
behavioral control is based on the explanation of Niv, Joel, and Dayan (2006).
Dolan and Dayan (2013) review four generations of experimental research related
to this issue and discuss how it can move forward on the basis of reinforcement
learning’s model-free/model-based distinction. Dickinson (1980, 1985) and Dick-
inson and Balleine (2002) discuss experimental evidence related to this distinction.
Donahoe and Burgos (2000) alternatively argue that model-free processes can
account for the results of outcome-devaluation experiments. Dayan and Berridge
(2014) argue that classical conditioning involves model-based processes. Rangel,
Camerer, and Montague (2008) review many of the outstanding issues involving
habitual, goal-directed, and Pavlovian modes of control.
Comments on Terminology— The traditional meaning of reinforcement in psychol-
ogy is the strengthening of a pattern of behavior (by increasing either its intensity or
frequency) as a result of an animal receiving a stimulus (or experiencing the omission
of a stimulus) in an appropriate temporal relationship with another stimulus or with a
response. Reinforcement produces changes that remain in future behavior. Sometimes in
psychology reinforcement refers to the process of producing lasting changes in behavior,
whether the changes strengthen or weaken a behavior pattern (Mackintosh, 1983). Letting
reinforcement refer to weakening in addition to strengthening is at odds with the everyday
meaning of reinforce, and its traditional use in psychology, but it is a useful extension
that we have adopted here. In either case, a stimulus considered to be the cause of the
behavioral change is called a reinforcer.
Psychologists do not generally use the speciﬁc phrase reinforcement learning as we
do. Animal learning pioneers probably regarded reinforcement and learning as being
synonymous, so it would be redundant to use both words. Our use of the phrase follows
its use in computational and engineering research, inﬂuenced mostly by Minsky (1961).
But the phrase is lately gaining currency in psychology and neuroscience, likely because
strong parallels have surfaced between reinforcement learning algorithms and animal
learning—parallels described in this chapter and the next.
According to common usage, a reward is an object or event that an animal will
approach and work for. A reward may be given to an animal in recognition of its ‘good’


--- Page 396 ---

374
Chapter 14: Psychology
behavior, or given in order to make the animal’s behavior ‘better.’ Similarly, a penalty is
an object or event that the animal usually avoids and that is given as a consequence of
‘bad’ behavior, usually in order to change that behavior. Primary reward is reward due
to machinery built into an animal’s nervous system by evolution to improve its chances
of survival and reproduction, for example, reward produced by the taste of nourishing
food, sexual contact, successful escape, and many other stimuli and events that predicted
reproductive success over the animal’s ancestral history. As explained in Section 14.2.1,
higher-order reward is reward delivered by stimuli that predict primary reward, either
directly or indirectly by predicting other stimuli that predict primary reward. Reward is
secondary if its rewarding quality is the result of directly predicting primary reward.
In this book we call Rt the ‘reward signal at time t,’ or sometimes just the ‘reward
at time t,’ but we do not think of it as an object or event in the agent’s environment.
Because Rt is a number—not an object or an event—it is more like a reward signal in
neuroscience, which is a signal internal to the brain, like the activity of neurons, that
inﬂuences decision making and learning. This signal might be triggered when the animal
perceives an attractive (or an aversive) object, but it can also be triggered by things that
do not physically exist in the animal’s external environment, such as memories, ideas, or
hallucinations. Because our Rt can be positive, negative, or zero, it might be better to
call a negative Rt a penalty, and an Rt equal to zero a neutral signal, but for simplicity
we generally avoid these terms.
In reinforcement learning, the process that generates all the Rts deﬁnes the problem
the agent is trying to solve. The agent’s objective is to keep the magnitude of Rt as large
as possible over time. In this respect, Rt is like primary reward for an animal if we think
of the problem the animal faces as the problem of obtaining as much primary reward as
possible over its lifetime (and thereby, through the prospective “wisdom” of evolution,
improve its chances of solving its real problem, which is to pass its genes on to future
generations). However, as we suggest in Chapter 15, it is unlikely that there is a single
“master” reward signal like Rt in an animal’s brain.
Not all reinforcers are rewards or penalties. Sometimes reinforcement is not the result
of an animal receiving a stimulus that evaluates its behavior by labeling the behavior
good or bad. A behavior pattern can be reinforced by a stimulus that arrives to an animal
no matter how the animal behaved. As described in Section 14.1, whether the delivery of
reinforcement depends, or does not depend, on preceding behavior is the deﬁning di↵erence
between instrumental, or operant, conditioning experiments and classical, or Pavlovian,
conditioning experiments. Reinforcement is at work in both types of experiments, but
only in the former is it feedback that evaluates past behavior. (Though it has often been
pointed out that even when the reinforcing US in a classical conditioning experiment is
not contingent on the subject’s preceding behavior, its reinforcing value can be inﬂuenced
by this behavior, an example being that a closed eye makes an air pu↵to the eye less
aversive.)
The distinction between reward signals and reinforcement signals is a crucial point
when we discuss neural correlates of these signals in the next chapter. Like a reward signal,
for us, the reinforcement signal at any speciﬁc time is a positive or negative number, or
zero. A reinforcement signal is the major factor directing changes a learning algorithm


--- Page 397 ---

14.7. Summary
375
makes in an agent’s policy, value estimates, or environment models. The deﬁnition that
makes the most sense to us is that a reinforcement signal at any time is a number that
multiplies (possibly along with some constants) a vector to determine parameter updates
in some learning algorithm.
For some algorithms, the reward signal alone is the critical multiplier in the parameter-
update equation.
For these algorithms the reinforcement signal is the same as the
reward signal. But for most of the algorithms we discuss in this book, reinforcement
signals include terms in addition to the reward signal, an example being a TD error
δt = Rt+1 + γV (St+1) −V (St), which is the reinforcement signal for TD state-value
learning (and analogous TD errors for action-value learning). In this reinforcement signal,
Rt+1 is the primary reinforcement contribution, and the temporal di↵erence in predicted
values, γV (St+1) −V (St) (or an analogous temporal di↵erence for action values), is
the conditioned reinforcement contribution. Thus, whenever γV (St+1) −V (St) = 0, δt
signals ‘pure’ primary reinforcement; and whenever Rt+1 = 0, it signals ‘pure’ conditioned
reinforcement, but it often signals a mixture of these. Note as we mentioned in Section 6.1,
this δt is not available until time t + 1. We therefore think of δt as the reinforcement
signal at time t + 1, which is ﬁtting because it reinforces predictions and/or actions made
earlier at step t.
A possible source of confusion is the terminology used by the famous psychologist
B. F. Skinner and his followers. For Skinner, positive reinforcement occurs when the
consequences of an animal’s behavior increase the frequency of that behavior; punishment
occurs when the behavior’s consequences decrease that behavior’s frequency. Negative
reinforcement occurs when behavior leads to the removal of an aversive stimulus (that is,
a stimulus the animal does not like), thereby increasing the frequency of that behavior.
Negative punishment, on the other hand, occurs when behavior leads to the removal of an
appetitive stimulus (that is, a stimulus the animal likes), thereby decreasing the frequency
of that behavior. We ﬁnd no critical need for these distinctions because our approach
is more abstract than this, with both reward and reinforcement signals allowed to take
on both positive and negative values. (But note especially that when our reinforcement
signal is negative, it is not the same as Skinner’s negative reinforcement.)
On the other hand, it has often been pointed out that using a single number as a
reward or a penalty signal, depending only on its sign, is at odds with the fact that
animals’ appetitive and aversive systems have qualitatively di↵erent properties and
involve di↵erent brain mechanisms. This points to a direction in which the reinforcement
learning framework might be developed in the future to exploit computational advantages
of separate appetitive and aversive systems, but for now we are passing over these
possibilities.
Another discrepancy in terminology is how we use the word action. To many cognitive
scientists, an action is purposeful in the sense of being the result of an animal’s knowledge
about the relationship between the behavior in question and the consequences of that
behavior. An action is goal-directed and the result of a decision, whereas a response
is triggered by a stimulus and is the result of a reﬂex or a habit. We use the word
action without di↵erentiating among what others call actions, decisions, and responses.
These are important distinctions, but for us they are encompassed by di↵erences between


--- Page 398 ---

376
Chapter 14: Psychology
model-free and model-based reinforcement learning algorithms, which we discussed above
in relation to habitual and goal-directed behavior in Section 14.6. Dickinson (1985)
discusses the distinction between responses and actions.
A term used a lot in this book is control. What we mean by control is entirely di↵erent
from what it means to animal learning psychologists. By control we mean that an agent
inﬂuences its environment to bring about states or events that the agent prefers: the agent
exerts control over its environment. This is the sense of control used by control engineers.
In psychology, on the other hand, control typically means that an animal’s behavior is
inﬂuenced by—is controlled by—the stimuli the animal receives (stimulus control) or
the reinforcement schedule it experiences. Here the environment is controlling the agent.
Control in this sense is the basis of behavior modiﬁcation therapy. Of course, both of
these directions of control are at play when an agent interacts with its environment,
but our focus is on the agent as controller, not the environment as controller. A view
equivalent to ours, and perhaps more illuminating, is that the agent is actually controlling
the input it receives from its environment (Powers, 1973). This is not what psychologists
mean by stimulus control.
Sometimes reinforcement learning is understood to refer solely to learning policies
directly from rewards (and penalties) without the involvement of value functions or
environment models. This is what psychologists call stimulus-response, or S-R, learning.
But for us, along with most of today’s psychologists, reinforcement learning is much
broader than this, including in addition to S-R learning, methods involving value functions,
environment models, planning, and other processes that are commonly thought to belong
to the more cognitive side of mental functioning.

